# Should we hide death from children?

*2017-12-09*

Someone must have whispered into her ear that she had turned 100, she
just let go, rolled up her eyes, opened her mouth wide and died. She was
only 98. She loved her sons fiercely and imagined that their skin was
fairer than it actually was; she grew to admire her daughters in her old
age; enjoyed the sight of little girls finally when they appeared in the
shapes of great-granddaughters; and strictly speaking, she never broke
the law while dealing with her daughters-in-law. She was of a time and
place, and appeared to be puzzled by everything else. Once, according to
family legend, she thought everyone at home was being too respectful of
their young neighbour, Mrs Banerjee, and insisted on calling her
“Banner".

A dead old woman is absurdly little. In the house of her eldest son, as
she lies on the floor, she is just a long smudge in the white shroud.
There are only eight people in the house and as they have not seen death
often they do not know what they must do. Can they sit on chairs? Can
she be left alone in the room? Should there be flowers on the body, and
are roses all right? How is a woman cremated, does one call the
crematorium and set up a time, and where exactly is such a place? Do you
need a death certificate to burn the dead? But the most serious
confusion is about whether the matriarch’s great-granddaughters should
be summoned from school to say their goodbyes to the old woman who used
to break into a fond toothless smile upon seeing them and whom the girls
gaped at with affection and bafflement.

There is a view that children “should not be protected" from
unpleasantness and that they must see all sides of life, which, of
course, includes death. But one of the great-grandchildren of the
matriarch is my own nine-year-old daughter, and as the question at hand
is whether she is ready to see the first corpse of her life, I am
suddenly reminded how wrong the world is about almost everything. What
must I do? When the girl’s mother and I talk about the matter, we are
like two actors who have arrived for the first rehearsal of an
argumentative play but do not know the script. That is so rare in a
marriage where things that are said have been said before.

Why should a little girl witness the remains of death? What exactly is
she going to gain from seeing a corpse lying on a floor? How will she
react when she enters the room and sees the lifeless body of a person
who has held her in an old woman’s supernatural grip, and whom the girl
has defended with an indignant face when she suspected the adults were
grumbling about her? And will the girl now seriously question my claim
of immortality? Truth is important but why can’t it wait? She is having
a perfectly happy day right now at school, socializing with other
children and, when she does focus, learning “number places" or something
like that. Why must a child be dragged to the bleak reminder that
everyone who is dear to her is going to die one day?

But then doesn’t a child have a right to mourn? Every time she has
visited this house she has run inside to the matriarch’s room and
chatted, and at times looked on at the spectacle of an ancient person
doing things. Why must we presume that she is not strong enough to see
clearly the remains of the woman and say goodbye? If we deny her this,
when she learns later that the matriarch is gone and that her parents
had fled through some back door with the body, will the fact mystify
death for her more than it should? Will she then think that life is only
about happiness, which has to be the most naive way to live, on par with
the blankness of people who go through life asking what there is in it
for them, what “the takeaway" is. To assume that life that is worth
living is only that which has happiness in it, is the same as imagining
that the only food worth eating is junk food.

So the question is not when exactly must a little human see the corpse
of a beloved but something else. Now that death has occurred in the
family, what must be conveyed to a nine-year-old girl: This is too dark
for you? Or, look fully and carefully at this very important phenomenon?

We wonder whether a child who is too protected will overreact to the
simplest of human miseries, like Prince Siddhartha minus the Bodhi tree.
In any case, it is impossible to protect middle-class Indian children
from miseries because they see these every day on the roads. The wake of
an affluent centurion is going to be far more pleasant than the sight of
little stunted children in plain sight begging for food.

The girl whose welfare everyone is debating is one who glares at people
who discuss her as though she is not in the room, and who pokes her
chest and says, “Excuse me, I am here." So maybe we should just ask her
what she wants to do. The wake or a play date? Also, there are some
logistical issues and we do not have a choice but to fetch her early
from school.

Very few things can be more morbid for a child than the cryptic message
from her teacher that she has to leave early. The girl will know
something bad has happened. When someone comes to the school to fetch
you early, you are not exactly going to the Swiss Alps.

Everything about death, even the transmission of its news, is so
unwieldy, nothing goes smoothly. The school’s security is told of a
“death in the family". The guard is supposed to tell the teacher but
when he does not find the teacher in the classroom he breaks the news to
the girl, who goes numb, quietly packs her bag and walks to the gates
not knowing who has died. Whose death will relieve her? When the guard
is confronted, he wonders what the fuss is about. He says, what is the
big deal in telling a child someone in the family has died?

The girl is finally told of the demise of the matriarch. She cries. At
first she does not wish to see the body but then she is very clear she
wants to.

She walks into the house and sees the shrouded sliver of a corpse. She
seems fine, but does not say anything about the matter. There are many
relatives about now, and more mourners are trickling in every minute,
but she is the only child around. Her cousins have been “protected".

There is chatter in the house—about vacations and demonetization and
future plans, lots of future plans. This is the triumph of a very old
lady—there is melancholy in her brood, not trauma. I am grateful the
girl is able to sense it. She too begins to talk about mundane things;
20ft away, the body gains shawls and flowers.

I attempt to interview the little girl.

“What is going on inside your head right now?"

“This is evil interview."

“Why evil? Do you mean gloomy, sad?"

As is her habit, she begins to ask the questions.

“What do you prefer," she asks, “burying or burning?"

“I hate this topic." It is, suddenly, me who is not prepared for the
grand subject of death.

“Burying or burning?" she asks.

“I don’t know."

“Electric or logs?"

“I don’t know."

“If you are buried, there will be worms getting into your nose," she
says.

She then sings and mutters nonsense and talks about her life and times.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
