# Why we search for meaning in Roger Federer

*2017-06-30*

The antimatter of literature might be sports commentary. In sports
commentary, intense men convey excitement by being excitable, they
repeat things, scream clichés, describe matters that are in plain sight
as though for the blind, and use poor metaphors. For instance, the
batsman they called “The Wall”, Rahul Dravid, has the world record for
losing his stumps the highest number of times in Test cricket. And they
called Shoaib Akhtar, who was the fastest bowler of his generation,
“Rawalpindi Express”, a Pakistani train that was slower than him. These
metaphors have stuck because, unlike literature, sports commentary is
influential.

In commentary, an observation is what is seen and reported. In
literature, an observation is what is seen, then remembered, imagined,
interpreted or recounted in a manner that makes the self-centred reader
mistakenly relate to it. Roger Federer, who has begun his 19th campaign
for the Wimbledon title, would have been a subject of commentary alone
(“Did you see that”, “Genius”, “What a beauty”) if it were not for some
qualities that have attracted the attention of literature (“Roger
Federer As Religious Experience”).

The above-mentioned piece of literature was by the American writer David
Foster Wallace, who himself was “a near great junior tennis player”, in
his own words. The essay published in The New York Times in 2006 was, in
large swathes of prose, an unsentimental analysis of Federer’s game, the
nature of muscles and the technology of new rackets, but it was at its
core a tribute to his artistic beauty, the impossibility of some of his
shots, and the inexplicable, “metaphysical” nature of his game. Wallace
never once used the expression “religious experience”. He was the sort
of man who would prefer “spiritual” to “religious”. He borrowed the term
from a bus driver whose analysis of Federer’s game was “bloody
near-religious experience”. It was a description that Wallace, and the
hundreds of thousands who read the essay, endorsed. In 2008, Wallace
killed himself; it brought a level of fame to the article that was
unprecedented for a sports essay.

Beauty in sports has become an underdog. It has, oddly, become a form of
weakness that is thrashed by the brute force of power. But Federer is
the revenge of beauty. No other athlete today represents so many facets
of grace. In him is the victory of elegance over power, as though in the
fable of modern sports, elegance is somehow moral and muscular power is
evil. Also, even though nobody refers to Federer’s beauty as feminine,
its arch-villains are usually depicted as manly things. This despite the
fact that he has considerable manly power himself. And his perfection is
somehow rated higher than the perfection of players whose shots are not
as attractive as his.

He is not about beauty alone any more. He radiates meaning depending on
who the observer is. That he is 35 and still a top-level athlete would
not have been such a surprise if most people in their 30s, especially
sports journalists, were fit. His endurance as a professional athlete
informs his fans of the seeming connection between grace and longevity.
His more muscular arch-rival, Rafael Nadal, has been ruined by injuries
while Federer has, largely, waltzed along. Also, in the unspoken
perception of his observers, his wife Mirka, who has lived in public
memory almost as long as his fame, even as the more glamorous partners
of his contemporaries have proven to be seasonal, lends him a certain
depth as a man. His ability to cry publicly, they associate with how
much tennis matters to him. Privately, most women, if not all, appear to
be annoyed by his propensity to burst into tears, and even in that there
is a lesson for his male fans—that they should not be fooled into
believing that it is all right for modern men to cry.

Tennis, as it is an individual game (so is cricket, but that argument
another day), does not convey obvious management lessons—especially
Roger Federer’s game. Genius, style and beauty translate very poorly in
management talk. But an integral part of corporate bull today is the
linking of every major sporting phenomenon to management lessons. Team
sports, like football, are the beloved of gurus who wish to convey the
importance of “team effort”, which is very simply the supremacy of a
group of ordinary men over the stardom of the genius. Federer, even
though he stands to disprove almost every cherished management lesson
about the importance of the ordinary, is too big and too popular for the
gurus to ignore. So even they are forced to see meaning in him.

There are icons in other sports who have inspired writers to see more
than what is obvious. Almost all of Brazilian football would qualify.
Tiger Woods, once upon a time. Magnus Carlsen, for the few who can
understand why his chess is beautiful. Sachin Tendulkar, of course. But
Federer has one quality that the other comparable athletes do not
possess, a quality that is important to the elite anywhere even though
the establishment does not explicitly speak about it—he is posh, like
them. He is capable of speaking about his sport and his own game with a
degree of sophistication. In him, finally, there is a relationship
between sporting aesthetics and social refinement. But despite his
articulation in at least three of the world’s most influential
languages, he does not seem to have a significant view about most of the
esoteric things that are said about him. His legend appears to be partly
the imagination of those who wish to see in him a grand victory for
beauty.

I must confess that I am among the writers who has seen more in him than
he probably does himself. I have undertaken a pilgrimage to Shanghai to
watch him in a stadium, up close, to confirm my theories about him. For
example, I wish to see in Federer the true meaning of style, which is
that it is not a form of rebellion against the norms but in fact the
perfect adoption of conventional wisdom. Also, in an unspoken war of our
times—between the stylish, who stand for beauty, versus the efficient,
who stand for getting things done—I want to believe Federer is nature’s
sly admission that it is on the side of style. Also in him, I wish to
believe, is the proof that sometimes the most beautiful thing in us is
also the least efficient. Like Roger Federer’s backhand.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People. He tweets at @manujosephsan
