# Are motivational talks useful?

*2017-05-26*

The discovery of the happiest human, a few years ago, was convincing to
the extent that the person turned out to be a man. Everything else was
suspect. He was French. Yet another European who had fled family and
civilization to don maroon robes and live as a monk in the Himalayas.
About such men, the Kerala police would say that they are only hiding
from their police. The fact is that a neuroscientist studied Matthieu
Ricard for over a decade, even attached many electrodes to his skull,
and claimed that the frequency of the gamma waves emanating from his
brain was unusual. That meant nothing really. The link between a brain’s
gamma waves and consciousness is nothing more than popular
pseudo-science. But journalists declared him “the happiest man”. Ricard
then travelled to unhappy parts of the world and delivered talks on
happiness.

Thousands listen to him, an act they consider very important, possibly
transformative. He is not a charlatan, he is a philosopher who has
highly influential notions about happiness. He is funny and wise. But is
he as useful to his listeners as they imagine? Are they mistaking
entertainment for a life hack?

His central message is that we should want less and thus find happiness.
It is hard to argue with the message, but then it is a familiar one. For
thousands of years, men in unusual costumes have said the same thing.
Even Baloo to Mowgli in The Jungle Book: “Look for the bare necessities.
The simple bare necessities. Forget about your worries and your strife.”

Ricard is a bit more complex than Baloo; he says that any brain can be
altered through mind exercises, which is a reasonable and an important
argument. But still, are people transformed when they hear such words?
Or do they remain the same because they do not possess the neurological
system that can nudge them to make the choices Ricard made for himself?

What Ricard and all motivational speakers, including Baloo, are actually
saying is, “Be like me. Why can’t you be like me?” And that is among the
most futile instructions in the history of human communication.

There are broadly five kinds of inspirational talks: the billionaire’s
advice to college students; a celebrity’s triumph against a misfortune;
a social underdog’s passage to success; a successful person’s praise of
failure and losers; and a general suggestion that you must do the very
opposite of whatever it is that you are doing right now.

One of the most famous inspirational speeches was delivered by the
co-founder of Apple, the late Steve Jobs, at Stanford in 2005. He was on
an ascent once again. It was before the launch of the iPhone but the new
Mac, iPod and Pixar had already promised him a place in history. One
morning, a year earlier, he had been diagnosed with an incurable form of
pancreatic cancer, but in the evening that same day, the doctors
realized that it was a rare, curable form of cancer. When he delivered
the commencement address, Jobs did not know that he was not off the hook
yet. He spoke about death, being a college dropout, and failure. He told
the students: “The only way to do great work is to love what you do. If
you haven’t found it yet, keep looking. Don’t settle.” He said it again
later, “Don’t settle.” His most famous words were probably, “Your time
is limited, so don’t waste it living someone else’s life. Don’t be
trapped by dogma—which is living with the results of other people’s
thinking. Don’t let the noise of others’ opinions drown out your own
inner voice.”

The speech has been viewed online millions of times and its text has
probably been read by as many. But I assume that an overwhelming
majority of his audience, especially the Stanford students, do not love
their present jobs, they settle every day, their lives are filled with
compromises and they raise loving families purely through their
professional caution and artistic defeats. Most of Jobs’ listeners, and
the youth who will listen to him in the future, will live “someone
else’s life” because they cannot come up with their own; they will be
“trapped in dogma”, in fact they would be lost without dogma; and they
will “let the noise of others’ opinions drown out” their own because
they do not have strong opinions. They are not Steve Jobs, hence they
will never be him. Jobs did attempt to inspire but he was, in reality,
asking people to be like him.

So did film-maker George Lucas when he said, “We are all living in cages
with the door wide open.” I know people who love the quote, who mention
it in their brief bios, but they have spent their whole lives locking
their cage doors because the forest outside is scary. The world is
filled with people who would cherish billionaire Richard Branson’s
declaration that “you don’t learn to walk by following rules”, but they
are the same conformists who torture the few who try to break the rules.

Jobs, in his speech, also told the students: “For the past 33 years, I
have looked in the mirror every morning and asked myself: ‘If today were
the last day of my life, would I want to do what I am about to do
today?’ And whenever the answer has been ‘No’ for too many days in a
row, I know I need to change something.”

This part of his speech is curious because he begins the strand with a
contradictory view—“if you live each day as if it was your last, someday
you’ll most certainly be right.” This, in fact, is the view of the
majority. That when it is not the last day of your life, it is extremely
dangerous to live as if it is.

The transformative powers of motivational talks appear to be vastly
overstated. But they certainly are not merely entertainment that people
misunderstand as modern scripture. The most precious thing about a
motivational talk is not motivation, it is something else.

Poetry has failed to capture most of the world because it calls itself
poetry. But when it names itself pop or rock or folk, it becomes
mainstream culture. Literature is most powerful when it is not called
that. And that is what the finest motivational talks do.

Couched as self-improvement, motivational talks take the beauty and
power of literature and its ability to sting with insights, to a vast
innocent audience that asks the most foolish question of our times,
“What is the takeaway?” People then sit and listen to billionaires and
monks, thinking they are in the sway of profitable inspiration, but in
reality it is the trance of the good old story.

This is not to say that motivational talks do not motivate at all, and
that they have none of the materialistic uses that people who ask for
“takeaway” wish for. Such talks do transform but not everyone, not the
millions. It transforms a few, the exceptional who are as talented or
odd as the orators. That is why the most misleading aspect of a great
motivational talk is that it is popular.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People. The writer tweets at @manujosephsan
