# Why the poor don’t kill us

*2017-07-22*

Across the nation maids are talking back; who knows one day they may
even demand long-handle mops to clean the floors. The rich wonder if it
is all because of the employment guarantee schemes conceived by the
profligate Congress government—the poor seem to have options these days.
The wages, too, have soared. In any case, the middle class, at least the
young and the refined, want to be nice to their servants. The
conscientious sahib even exclaims on social media how cruel it is that
maids are “expected to be invisible". The madam, though as
conscientious, is unlikely to say that, or let the maid use her toilet
or the cutlery. Across urban homes, however, the maids are sitting on
footstools, even chairs, in the presence of their employers. If there is
a time-lapse video of seated maids across a stretch of 10 years, it
would show them slowly soaring from floor to sofa. Also, the maids today
are not the tragic malnourished women of once upon a time. And their
infants are roly-poly.

A cluster of apartment blocks called Mahagun Moderne in Noida, adjacent
to Delhi, where hundreds of maids worked, was not very different from
the rest of the urban hives until a few days ago, when a riot broke out.
A mob of maids and their men attacked the society after one of the
maids, a young woman, went missing and her family thought she had been
detained by a family that had earlier accused her of stealing money.

Similar scuffles have occurred in other parts of Delhi. The occurrences
are rare but they may be a portent of what is to come. The
master-servant equilibrium of Indian society is collapsing. The poor are
becoming socially and politically more empowered than ever before.

What is surprising is why they do not attack more often. How does vast
poverty tolerate the wealth of a few, who are vulgar just to appear so
rich in plain sight. Many a time, even if you are just walking with an
ice cream in hand, you feel you are taunting the poor. Why don’t the
poor rise in revolt and cause end-of-days havoc? Order suits the rich.
Chaos is a leveller. Do the poor overestimate the defences of the rich?
Why are we safe?

There is a type of phoney Indian who would, with flared noble nostrils,
say the poor will not do it because they are such wonderful folk. But
just as foolish is the innate suspicion of rich India that the poor are
prone to criminality and violence, and that they are kept in check by
religious or other mystical forces. But the fact is India’s poor shun
violence for the same reasons most human beings abhor violence. They
wish to be humane.

There is something far less pleasant that guards the rich—the near
absence of human rights for the poor in a police station or a prison, or
in the rest of the judicial process. India is not a safe place for the
rich but it is safer than it should be, or even compared to more mature
economies like South Africa, because the consequences of crimes against
the rich are severe in India. Mumbai’s underworld, for example, was an
organized attempt by gangs to steal from the rich, but when they began
to employ efficient lawyers and use the legal process to free their
captured men, society responded through extrajudicial killings of
criminals. What India lacks through order it often makes up through
informality. The less democratic a nation, the safer it is for the rich.
Street safety in China, it will not surprise us, is much better than in
India.

But the most important reason why it is hard for anyone to organize
India’s poor against the rich is that such a system already exists—in
the form of electoral politics. As long as the poor believe that they
own politics, they will find greater release in that legitimate
revolution than in self-destructive rage.

Indian politics thus is largely a revenge of the poor, or at least an
attempt. That is one of the reasons why demonetization did not destroy
the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), as the liberals had hoped. The party
has won more than 10 elections since that announcement. The poor thought
the rich suffered more than them.

Everything considered, the rich are great beneficiaries of poverty. It
is very cheap to be rich in India. As the chief economic adviser, Arvind
Subramanian, pointed out, the subsidies that the rich so hate are
designed for the poor but are best experienced by the rich. But the
benefits are not as trivial as being served by a maid who would skin
hundreds of soya beans for hours and crush them into milk. In a poor
nation, the social elite can pass through life without facing any
substantial competition. That is why the frequent middle-class
accusation of “nepotism" in the film industry is somewhat amusing—not
just Bollywood dynasties, almost the entire Indian upper class owes its
supremacy to the huge advantages its families have provided.

The poor also serve the rich by providing them a clear moral
goal—eradicate poverty. Every learned Indian is a poverty eradication
thinker. Many among the elite youth lament “inequality", though all they
have to do to reduce inequality is, instead of lamenting, refuse to go
to expensive American colleges, and boycott inheritance. In the sheer
absurdity of the youth even considering such a drastic sacrifice lies a
more disturbing question—can the beneficiaries of inequality really end
it? In their subterranean minds, do they actually wish inequality to
continue?

As the nation transforms and the facile deference and the isolation of
the poor dissolves, the rich are responding by paying a premium for
places and experiences that will not be diminished by the other kind of
Indians. When India is expensive, it is not because it has something of
value to offer, it is the price one pays for keeping the riff-raff out.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
