# You, according to fake news

*2017-06-17*

A good lie is never known as a lie. A famous lie is a different matter.
A lie that is famously a lie is the very opposite of a good lie. How
then does it become popular? In the answer lies the true nature of “fake
news”, which is an unsatisfactory name given to a broad range of
things—fabricated information, propaganda, rumours, pranks and hoaxes.

You may have wondered why you are reading so many articles about fake
news these days. The matter appears to be an internal crisis of
journalism, so why must you be bothered so often by what interests
journalists? But fake news is almost entirely about you. According to
mainstream intellectual opinion, you are often a victim of fake news, a
gullible simpleton who falls for any nonsense you read free of cost on
the Internet, which you then transmit to your friends. But it is this
hypothesis that is too simple. Something else is going on.

Several months ago, after Prime Minister Narendra Modi introduced
Rs2,000 notes, word spread that the notes were the most technologically
advanced currency ever, so sophisticated that they could be traced by
the government, even tracked a few metres underground, which was a nice
touch. The popularity of the lie was on a par with the best lies that US
President Donald Trump’s campaign had generated. For instance, the news
that the Pope had endorsed his campaign. Most observers appear to
believe that such lies contribute to the popularity of notorious public
figures. But if this view were true, lies would be universally helpful,
and the liar with the highest marketing budget would win. But that is
not how it goes. All lies are not equal, and the most successful lies
appear to help only a particular type of people.

When a public figure is immensely popular but reviled by an intellectual
elite that has an outsized influence over the respectable media, then he
does not become even more popular because a piece of fiction has gone
viral. Rather, what appears more probable is that the piece of fiction
goes viral because of the popularity of the public figure. Modi and
Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin did not become popular
because of the lies. The lies became popular because of them. Successful
fake news contains excellent storytelling techniques—it has a strong
protagonist who is very interesting because he is unpredictable, blunt
and morally ambiguous, it captures the current of the times and it
appears to be highly probable. It succeeds for the same reason that good
yarns work well. People wish to believe it.

Truth is always slower than a convenient lie. That is why health myths,
for instance, go deeper into the minds of people than health facts. The
half-truth that exercise could make you fatter than sloth would always
be more popular than the truth that complete abstinence from refined
carbohydrates will have a profound effect on your well-being.

I do not suggest that fake news does not create misinformation at all,
just that its transformative powers are overstated.

Yuval Noah Harari, a historian who is best known for his book Sapiens,
argues that the very success of the human race lies in its ability to
believe in fiction, which according to him includes religion and all
political and economic ideologies. “Ever since the Stone Age,
self-reinforcing myths have served to unite human collectives. Indeed,
Homo sapiens conquered this planet thanks above all to the unique human
ability to create and spread fictions,” he wrote in a Bloomberg View
column. “The truth is that truth was never high on the agenda of Homo
sapiens.”

Harari is speaking of powerful forces, like delusions and their ability
to travel fast. Modern fake news is not always driven by such major
elements. It is, instead, the minor after-effect of colossal fiction
that has already been established, like the news of an idol drinking
milk or the statue of a Jewish virgin shedding tears are minor effects
of the establishment of two gigantic works of fiction.

The idea that a hugely popular lie is not influential but a reflection
of current beliefs, should alter our perception of the most organized
form of fake news—propaganda. Propaganda is usually generated by a
dominant political force. The perception that propaganda was how,
historically, evil men influenced ordinary people, is itself a form of
fake news. Over the decades, artists and academics, who make a living
out of sympathizing with social underdogs, have successfully created the
myth that ordinary people are victims of propaganda. The German public
of Hitler’s time, for instance, is only mildly implicated in his crimes
while the fact is that their political views and disposition made it
possible for the propaganda to be successful.

The conscientious liberals lament fascist propaganda and other forms of
fake news but they, too, generate or transmit it. But their fake news
never travels as fast and as wide as the right-wing fake news, and is
almost never as successful. A few days ago, some people were excited by
the cover of Time magazine, which is taken seriously these days only
when there is a hoax. The cover called Donald Trump “Liar-in-chief”. Not
surprisingly, intellectuals of a type loved it and passed it around. But
when they realized it was a hoax, they had to take it down to guard
their own reputation, and take it down with sheepish notes about how the
image had come from very credible sources, how they were so very sorry
for promoting a hoax.

About 15 years ago, the novelist and activist Arundhati Roy used some
strands of fake news in her essay on the Gujarat riots. One suggested
that Congress MP Ehsan Jafri’s daughter had been stripped and murdered,
while she was safe thousands of kilometres away. Roy had no choice but
to tender an apology, however grudging.

The transmission of liberal fake news is often slowed this way—by the
strict requirements of decency. But intellectuals fall for and transmit
fake news for the same reason that semi-literates do: The news
corroborates their delusions.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The
Illicit Happiness Of Other People.*
