# School&#8217;s out, what should our children do?

*2017-05-19*

In the summers, city children are made to undertake so many recreational
activities, it is as though they are inmates of Tihar jail. They learn
painting, origami, pottery, embroidery, music, karate and sports. Also,
chocolate-making. It is a consequence of a colonial idea called the
summer vacation. Parents are skilled in tormenting schools to achieve
their ends but they have not moved to abolish the two-month-long break
that takes summer, merely a season, too seriously.

Parents have not killed the summer vacation probably because they do not
wish to appear as though they do not want to spend time with their
children. It is inauspicious. Instead, in the summers they contribute to
a huge cash-economy market for character-building activities. This is
partly to get rid of their children for a few hours every day, and
partly to prepare them for the serious business of life. An objective of
a good family, after all, is to prepare its children to be better than a
majority of the world’s children.

That children must do something useful with their time is part of the
canon of modern parenting. Also that everything the child does has to be
laced with the sugar of entertainment. As a result, children are
constantly entertained, with only the degree changing, and they have
come to expect life to be ceaselessly entertaining. But then there are
many beautiful things in life that have to begin in tedium. Tedium has
to be first given a chance.

I have started asking my daughter to get bored. It is, in reality, a
popular idea and many parents around the world are aware of the charms
of boredom.

This year, when I first asked my eight-year-old to get bored, she said I
must help her, which seemed like an insult. I asked her to let her mind
wander. She instead chose to consider some problems that scientists were
struggling to solve. I asked her to figure out where space ended. She
lay in bed trying to solve the puzzle. She said space did not end
because space was all the time creating more space, like people created
more people, which I thought was not a bad consequence of letting the
mind wander. But then after an hour she asked if she was real or a video
game inside a gigantic iPad, and I thought maybe I should let her watch
one of those stupid serials for children on Netflix.

The scholarly view on boredom is that it inspires a child to overcome
the ennui by creating something marvellous. It is true that children,
when solitary and bored, end up writing stories or painting or taking
apart objects to see what is inside. It seems appropriate that most
children themselves are magnificent products of two adults in the gentle
rot of happy life who then decide to search for greater meaning.

Among psychologists and some parents, there is a celebration of the idea
of boredom. Even though I believe in the idea of boredom I feel they are
overrating the force of the concept. Many of us, who had a very boring
childhood and adolescence, and who did reasonable things as a
consequence, did so because we did not have a choice. It was a time,
though not long ago, when the world did not try hard to entertain a
child. Pilgrimage, then, was vacation. Also, a family’s economic
condition and the dysfunctions of parents greatly contributed to a
child’s boredom. Boredom was a roll of the dice, and some of us made the
best use of it. But children today live in a world where distraction is
the very goal of giant industries, and parents can afford to spend a lot
of money to entertain them.

Boredom can never be planted in a child because her mind will always try
to liberate itself from the lull, and succeed. If we force it on her by
denying her the things her peers enjoy, then the moment she finds
independence, she would forsake boredom anyway. How then can boredom be
instilled as an intellectual subsystem in a little person?

The hypothesis that boredom would inspire an impressive rescue act in a
child and make her do stuff is an opportunistic way of looking at a very
important sentiment. The whole point of boredom is that it promises no
reward, it trains the mind to be solitary and to introspect without the
requirement of excitement. If the capacity for boredom is instilled in a
child as the ability to be alone without entertainment, excitement, or
even purpose, for long periods of time, that would be the seeding of a
very useful faculty.

The arch-enemy of introspection is not entertainment, but education.
There is a whole stream of very important things a child has to learn, a
stream that intensifies as she grows up. It is easy to defame
entertainment, and modern parents have done that as well as parents a
generation ago had defamed love and sex, but not everyone has the
courage to defame education. Children have no choice today but to learn
many things that everybody is telling them are important. In time they
will learn things that they love, mostly they will learn things they
despise. And they will neglect many of their dreams. All through, they
are going to be too busy to be bored.

Recently, Bill Gates sent out advice to fresh graduates in a series of
tweets. He told them: “AI, energy and biosciences are promising fields
where you can make a huge impact. It’s what I would do if starting out
today.” But his first tweet in the series said that predictions can look
very silly in the future, and he had posted a clip of a moment from the
film The Graduate, where a man is telling a young man, “I want to say
one word to you. Just one word…Are you listening?...Plastics…There’s a
great future in plastics.”

Yet, it is hard for children to ignore the fields that the world’s most
influential people are claiming to be the future. Not surprising then
that children are already beginning to learn coding in their summer
breaks. In the middle of all this, as they fully ingest the melancholy
of preparing for life, it is probably unfair to remind them to practise
sitting alone and doing nothing.

Maybe the capacity for boredom is an innate trait, or maybe it is a gift
of circumstances, or maybe it is a combination of the two. What is
certain is that we will not be able to teach introspective boredom to
our children. They will seek a hectic life from the universe, and the
universe would most likely grant them that.

Maybe parents have not abolished the summer vacation because summers do
get easier as the child grows up. You don’t have to ask them to get
bored. They are not in your path the way they were earlier. You don’t
know when exactly it happened but suddenly they have friends and gangs
and life. And it is you who craves their attention, and it is they who
then ask you to go get bored.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People.
