# What intellectuals who are often wrong teach us about hope

*2017-12-23*

Hope is a lapse in concentration. It is, of course, many beautiful
things, but at its core it is a distraction that pretends to be
analysis.

This is one reason why Indian intellectuals who wish to see the end of
Prime Minister Narendra Modi get the public perception of his policies
and the prediction of election results completely wrong. Again and
again. Last week, Yogendra Yadav, the academic activist, confused hope
with psephology and interpreted spurious data to conclude that the
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) “is in for a shock defeat" in Gujarat. He
even gave figures. Other observers expressed their hope through the more
cautious analysis that the contest between the BJP and the Indian
National Congress was going to be “neck and neck". In the end, the BJP
prevailed in Gujarat, and won Himachal Pradesh. The intellectuals
continue to see hope in the results—they see a dimming of Modi’s future
prospects. The curse of ideology is that it gets people addicted to
hope.

The public display of how hope dooms political analysis should make us
probe the private life of hope. What does the failure of hopeful
psephologists teach us about how we must live? Is hope the wrong reason
we do the right things, like wanting to live in this mist of
anticipation? When we analyse our lives, when we consider all the facts
and make an important decision, how deeply influenced are we by hope? Is
it even possible to liberate our reasoning from hope? There are people
who can, people who possess the gift of intuition, which is not as
common as it is made out to be.

The best political analysis in India is privately delivered,
off-the-record, by sharp politicians to friends or public figures whom
they admire, which usually does not include journalists. They have the
talent to see the truth in the forest of hope even when it confirms
their greatest fears. I have heard of such analyses, and when they are
predictions they often come true. Their accuracy, I believe, is a
consequence of a level of intuition that has the capacity to overwhelm
hope.

Intuition has supernatural trappings, it is an answer that anticipates
the question. A person with the gift is often unable to articulate what
is very obvious to him because the reasoning is yet to arrive in their
head. But the intuitive can see their circumstances with greater clarity
than most people.

In a mind that is not guarded by intuition, hope spreads like an
infestation, followed by despair when reality turns out to be something
else. Liberal political analysis in India, as in many parts of the
world, demonstrates this swing. They saw the destruction of Modi in
Jawaharlal Nehru University student Kanhaiya Kumar, “demonetization",
farmer agitations, Aadhaar, and the rise of communal killings, the
complex goods and services tax. Are some people more susceptible to hope
than others? Why?

Hope is also a form of fatigue. Our intense gaze at the future hurts our
body. Not metaphorically, but it really does take a toll on the body.
And the body tries to fool us, as it often does, to conserve itself. It
fools us into believing beautiful lies, and the probability of events,
and the finality of things, so that we will relax. This is how we love
“The One", and how writers decide on the “Final Draft" of a novel—as
victims of a tired body using the farce of adoration to stop the pursuit
and just rest. Maybe the secret to a good mind lies in physical exercise
that increases the body’s threshold for tricking us. As the late yoga
guru B.K.S. Iyengar once said, “How can you know God if you don’t know
your big toe?"

The ideologues who keep seeing the electoral defeat of Modi are men in
deep fatigue who see happy mirages. Their hope often mutates into a
convenient misunderstanding of people: that they are naïve, simple,
foolish, hence can be “educated" during the next election campaign.

I once asked the Australian novelist Richard Flanagan, who won the Man
Booker Prize in 2014, whether the pre-eminence of hope is a creation of
storytellers across the ages, because hope is a great plot device. You
try to write a story without hope, or watch a movie that has no hope,
and you will know. I believe there are tribes and cultures that have
less hope than others, that they are trained to be less hopeful.
Flanagan did not agree. He felt hope is too deeply human to be a
contribution of culture.

But every time I see Indian road traffic, and other forms of our chaos,
I am more certain than ever that in the heart of our disorder is a
slight excess of hope. We feel we can drive on the wrong side of an
eight-lane expressway, and get away. “In the end," we believe,
“everything works out fine."

Many of us are not only victims, but beneficiaries of hope. We passed
through a hard period, and unlike those who did not make it through, we
were filled with hope. When we look back, we see that the reasoning on
which the hope was built was faulty but we were lucky we did not know it
then. As a result, we were saved.

So, is clarity really more important than hope, especially if clarity
brings gloom, as it should, to the intellectuals whose prospects depend
on the end of Modi? Most people probably pass through life with great
grace, blinded by hope rather than the clarity of vision. It is amusing
that even political analysts do.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

The writer tweets at @manujosephsan
