# What I think when I think in English

*2017-08-12*

I used to hope in English, but all my other thoughts were in Tamil and
Malayalam. I was born in Kerala and raised in Chennai, a cuckoo among
the crows. I did not have a faculty for languages and could speak only
one dominant tongue at a time. I spoke fluent Tamil and a type of
Malayalam that would make Malayalees feel dejected. I wish I had told
them that I could think beautifully in Malayalam.

The way I remember my life then, my purest thoughts were in my mother
tongue. When I would resolve that I would one day lead my mother to
great consistent happiness, it was in Malayalam. But when I would
imagine Miss SM standing in her balcony combing her hair and I, in all
whites and white shoes (black heels) running in slow motion, my hair
bouncing, and when I would ask the universe silently the distraught
question, are girls capable of love at all, it was in Tamil.

However, by the age of 17, I was moving away from Tamil and Malayalam,
and beginning to think entirely in English. Are there serious
consequences when this happens or is the special-ness of language
overrated?

When I was around 10, during a monthly test in school, I was asked to
write the gender that would be the opposite of “Ram". I was baffled when
I realized that most of the class had got the alleged answer “Ewe". My
answer was Sita. I still maintain that I was right. No one in Chennai
had ever seen a ram, at least in the tropical city, while Ram, or Rama
as we used to call him, was deep culture. Everything else about English
was like this—it was venerable at a distance but all wrong when it
passed through me. It was a medium of study and intellect but to use it
in a casual conversation seemed comically arrogant. The act of speaking
in English, in fact, was defamed as “Putting Peter" in my circle. I was
among the boys who carried out the defamation. My teachers were not
fluent in English. When my parents spoke English, they, like all
Malayalees, spoke English in Malayalam. The effect of not being
colonized by English was that I was an insider in my home town. I
belonged to my city and the great beautiful city belonged to me. Not for
a moment was I an amateur Indian. I could talk to thugs and policemen
and slum-dwellers and eunuchs.

Being Tamil, or being Malayalee, was a distinct behavioural system and
only those who thought in either of those languages could play a part in
it. For instance, when some Tamilian Brahmin would want to convey an
insult, he would hedge the risk by putting it across as an ambiguous
joke. Also, Tamilians of my childhood had the propensity to use glee to
show contempt. They would laugh hard, in an exaggerated way, at the
jokes of the people they despised, especially their teachers or bosses.

All this I did not observe as a boy, when I used to think in Tamil.
Observation is not the act of seeing; it is the act of perceiving what
has already been seen. Only when I stopped thinking in Tamil did I begin
to see Chennai more clearly and deeply. The Argentine writer Jorge Luis
Borges once observed that you wouldn’t find the word “camel" in the
Quran—the ancient Arabs had no reason to mention what was very common in
almost every frame of their existence. Borges, it turned out, was wrong.
Camels do find mention in the holy book, but the rarity of their
appearance may still substantiate his larger point—that the camels were,
for an Arab, “a part of reality, and he had no reason to single them
out, while the first thing a forger, a tourist, or an Arab nationalist
would do is bring on the camels".

When I was growing up in Chennai, I was not proud of the city, or my
home state Kerala. Maybe those days we were not seriously required to be
proud of home. Love was enough. In fact, I made no special effort to
learn to read and write in Tamil or Malayalam. I used them only to think
and speak. I could write only in English and Hindi, both foreign to me,
Hindi more than English. Then, in 1987, a film called Nayakan by Mani
Ratnam was released. I was 13 and I thought it was the greatest film on
earth. I still believe it is one of the greatest in world cinema. I
decided that apart from being a journalist, I would also become a Tamil
film-maker. I began to write many stories, all in English.

When I was 16, I thought the best way to enter the movie business was as
a low-level actor. So when I heard that a film audition was under way
for some extras, I went. The queue was long and the men looked
impoverished and depressing, and the line had not moved after 2 hours,
so I left, abandoning the idea of acting. I wrote more stories. I even
co-wrote one with the milkman. Nothing ever came out of them. The Tamil
sphere of creativity offered me no prospects. For me, there were no
rewards for thinking in Tamil.

Meanwhile, my reading, in English, intensified. I was consumed by P.G.
Wodehouse, Salman Rushdie, Carl Sagan, Stephen Hawking and Ayn Rand. I
would not go beyond the first one-third of Gödel, Escher, Bach: An
Eternal Golden Braid by Douglas Hofstadter, but I was astonished. I did
not know this level of intellect was even possible. Also, I was yet
another adolescent in search of a bright future and only English
promised me that in the line of work I had chosen. When I entered
college to study English literature, my English diction was bad, and I
had to train myself to speak only in English to improve. I did not ask
myself then in what language I conducted my thoughts. But slowly,
without my being aware of it, I was colonized by the English language.

I am now stranded in English. Most days I have to consciously fight its
underrated influences. Unlike Indian languages, English has names for so
many abstract things, including lies, that they can be misunderstood as
truths, like socialism, hypnosis, sexism, liberty, human rights and
plain nonsense like “quality time" and “multitasking".

As a writer, especially as a novelist, even though I wish to write only
in English, I derive all my ways of seeing from my experiences as a
vernacular person. Forget subtlety. I belong to a melodramatic nation
and I do not accept subtlety as a higher form of expression. And while I
have accumulated a reasonably wide vocabulary as a reader, I use a very
limited range of words in my thoughts, and that is what I believe I have
a right to transmit to my novels. I would feel fake if I used some
words—for instance, salubrious, meadows and brook. Maybe I am always
trying only to write a good Tamil film in English. And while at it, I do
believe that I can now see more than the insiders; I am like the
outsider who is able to see the camel.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
