# Why we should not be ashamed of our contradictions

*2017-09-23*

A benign fraud in art and journalism is contrast photography, the kind
where the contrast is not a property of light, but of India. Burqa-clad
women walking beside girls in short skirts; the sari-draped scientists
of the space programme; a naked urchin at the giant glass window of an
upscale restaurant; the homeless beneath a builder’s hoarding; a
Bharatanatyam dancer holding a laptop. A meaningful question that we can
ask the creators of such frames is: “So?"

Five years from now there will certainly be an addition to the contrast
series: a malnourished farmer standing in the foreground as, in the
backdrop, India’s first bullet train charges over an elevated rail.
Already, cartoonists have lampooned the collision of the idea of the
high-speed train and the reality of India. One featured larger crowds
travelling on the roof of the bullet train, and in another, which is
more probable, a man is taking a dump as the train approaches.

There is an unspoken opinion in the contrast images—that something is
odd in the scene, that something is wrong; and in the case of the
bullet-train image of 2022, that the poor man is the victim of the
train, that it is vulgar for a nation to possess an expensive rail
system (even though it is mostly financed by Japan at almost no
interest) when many Indians have nothing to eat. At the sight of such
contradictions, a class of Indians are trained to feel guilty. But it is
time to accept that it is within the limits of decency not to be ashamed
anymore of India’s contrasts, that the contradictions are, of course,
vulgar, but then they are an honest and fundamental visual quality of a
middle-income nation trying to make something of itself. There are times
and places when the vulgarity of modern India is actually a good omen.

The lament against any infrastructural shine is an old habit of urban
Indian conscience. It may have made some sense in an age when public
spending was always zero-sum, but not anymore. The fact is that the
bullet train does not steal the resources of slower trains. And swanky
airports are in no way responsible for shanty railway stations. But
among a section of the population, the instinct to curse the masquerades
of wealth is very deep. Last year, the Indian Premier League, too, came
under severe attack for hosting matches in parched Maharashtra. The
complaint was that because a cricket ground needed thousands of litres
of water, cricket matches loot the meagre water resource of drought-hit
regions. But the fact is that it is on the day of a cricket match that a
cricket ground is not heavily watered. On most other days it is. So the
decision people have to make is whether they want a cricket ground, not
whether they can afford to host a cricket match. Also, the amount of
water that is needed to water an Indian cricket ground, which is between
15,000-20,000 litres, is the same as the amount of fresh water needed to
make one kilogram of chocolate, according to a global network called the
Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Yet, a cricket match would look
more vulgar in the harsh summer of Vidarbha than a concerned citizen in
the region eating chocolate to alleviate her rage at cruel capitalists.

But then are facts really more important than perception?

Many years ago, my employer lodged me in a chawl (a cheap tenement of
one-room homes), in Mumbai, but I objected to living in a place where
there were only common toilets shared by all residents. So the employer,
who was also the landlord of the chawl, decided to extend my room and
build a toilet. The property documents suggested that the landlord had
legal rights to build a toilet in my room, but not in any other home.
The residents did not mind, except one man who opposed the construction
of the private toilet on the grounds that it was a luxury, which will
make “the others feel very bad". He successfully inspired the residents
to block the plan.

In the larger scheme, too, logic, so often, is not so important or
influential as general perception and public emotion. And a poor nation,
especially, has to be very cautious and respectful of public sentiments.
Grand symbols of progress, like giant cable-stayed bridges and beautiful
buildings, can be dangerous for the politicians who build them. They can
also create disharmony in society if people feel excluded by them. For
instance, in the new disenchantment among Western Europe’s poor, such as
in France and Belgium, we should not underestimate the role of the
spectacular urban beauty of the great cities in the region.

Also, it would be wrong to assume that all the demonstrations of India’s
stark extremes are pointless. The pioneering images of the
contradictions are powerful. For instance, the 1966 photograph by Henri
Cartier-Bresson of an Indian space scientist carrying a rocket’s nose
cone on the back of his bicycle. The photograph means different things
to different people. Many feel proud to be reminded how impoverished
India was when the space programme began, and how valiant India’s vision
was. I am among those who are reminded that rocket science is so much
easier than poverty eradication. In fact, I propose that all writers
replace the obsolete expression, “It’s not rocket science" with “It’s
not poverty eradication".

Rockets historically, and even today, erroneously convey the idea of
progress. They are sexy in a way the war against malaria cannot be. This
is possibly why despots love missiles. This is possibly why India, too,
began its space programme—for quick, attainable pride. India was able to
flog it as a welfare programme. As a result it did not infuriate the
poor, but there are many other symbols of wealth or technology or
modernity that do not go down well in a poor nation.

The professional doom of the actor Rajinikanth, too, is in the
gentrification of his recent films. Chandrababu Naidu, the chief
minister of Andhra Pradesh, at the turn of the millennium, was always
seen with his laptop, but after major electoral setbacks, he was almost
never seen in public with the laptop again.

The image of a bullet train, especially of the train juxtaposed with
malnourished Indians, will not be popular. Yet, the economic service of
the vulgar high-speed train would be immeasurably larger than the street
altruism of the good folk.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed and Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
