# The misanthropic diet

*2017-08-05*

The most popular ideas that drive the world assume that humans, when
taken together, are nice people. That we, for instance, want everyone to
be equal. That when we stand in line and vote, only good can come out of
our collective wish (this view is still respectable in Britain and the
US). But there are some important ideas that have contempt for man.

Three years ago, the Union government issued advertisements asking Parsi
men not to use condoms, presumably during sex. The Parsis, who are rich
and literate, are endangered, and India was concerned. But India has
been trying to control the population of the rest of the nation. The
idea of population control is couched in humanitarian terms but it
really is a campaign to limit the children of the poor. Population
control is a people-hating, or a misanthropic, idea.

I promise that this piece is about eating.

Just that it is naive to assume that eating begins with food. It does
not even end with food. In fact, very little about eating is about food,
just as very little about religion is about god.

Apart from population control, there are other ideas that are noble yet
misanthropic. They may not hate people but they think poorly of them.
Almost the entire law enforcement system, and capitalism, for instance.
Lovers of nature view humans as the central problem. And there are
people who propagate the idea that having children is immoral.

There is another kind of misanthrope. They do not have a bitter view of
humans at all. As the American poet Charles Bukowski said, he does not
hate people, “I just feel better when they’re not around." The happy
misanthropes assume intelligence, by its very nature, is rare, hence a
minority condition. As a result, they are suspicious of collective human
behaviour. “Whenever you find yourself on the side of the majority, it
is time to pause and reflect." There are many quotes that are attributed
to the writer Mark Twain that he never said, but this he did.

It does not mean that if the happy misanthropes see a crowd fleeing an
unseen danger, they would run in the opposite direction. At times the
crowd is wise, but most of the time collective behaviour can be used to
glean what not to do. From this a very healthy personal diet may emerge.

Most people in the world are addicted to refined grain, which is sugar
for all practical purposes, and to a specific form of sugar, which is
widely known as sugar. The addiction has powerful delivery systems.
Mamma, family tradition, community tradition, love and friends are all
delivery systems of grain and sugar. Like the destined baby infects men
and women with delirious love, grain and sugar delude people into
thinking they are familial or traditional or religious.

As the happy misanthropes reject the ways of the majority and are able
to stand outside the huddles of society, they have a better chance than
others of liberating themselves from grain and sugar. Abstinence from
refined carbohydrates is also a renunciation of our agrarian heritage,
the very origin of our modern history, religions and politics, when
nomadic tribals were colonized by plants and transformed into settlers.
The happy misanthrope would not see any glory in being a nomad, he might
even be suspicious of the term “hunter-gatherer" as those two words are
now a foreboding of so much bull, but he sees wisdom in renouncing what
most people hold so dear.

A misanthrope is often misunderstood as a misogynist or a racist, when
perceived through narrow grouses. It is possible that most people who
are considered disciplined ascetic workers or eaters are, too, in
reality only misanthropes.

Beyond the cues from the majority, the misanthropes are also equipped to
listen carefully to their own bodies without being distracted by popular
wisdom or according too much respect to the many “findings" of
“science". The diet that emerges from this attitude is very clearly one
that is devoid of grain or artificial sugars, and contains lots of banal
boiled vegetables and moderate sources of protein and fat. It may not be
perfect as there might be no such thing as a perfect diet, but this
would resemble the highly regarded Zone diet and the Paleo diet, and
other healthy low-carb diets.

There are things that repulse most people but would enchant happy
misanthropes. For example, the death of food, at least food as we know
it. This will never happen unless there is a calamity, but work is under
way to make new kinds of food for those who want to eradicate the whole
business of foraging, cooking and then enduring a meal. The most popular
among such food is the American tech industry’s creation Soylent, which
is a no-nonsense drink that contains most of the minerals and nutrition
the body needs. Many people hate Soylent. Often they say they hate it
for its taste. It is, of course, not tasty but what they truly hate is
how the drink tries to substitute what is sacred. Soylent substitutes
not just food, but also replaces the recreation of everything associated
with food. Soylent does away with people, culture and collaboration.

Many millionaire and billionaire misanthropes in the Silicon Valley are
known to have replaced at least one daily meal with similar drinks or
vegetable shakes. Many follow intermittent fasting that eliminates
eating for most of the day, or for whole weekends.

The misanthrope does not have to entirely abstain from the junk of grain
and sugar. In fact, the true fun of grain and sugar is known only to
those who rarely consume it. After renunciation, on a binge day when you
eat Malabar parotta, you realize that there is a sort of pleasure in a
narcotic substance that the drug’s addicts will never know.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
