# Women in the &#8216;right wing&#8217;

*2017-04-28*

The two women get along. They are patriots, they believe Hinduism is
also a place, they deny they are right wing because ancient European
labels do not make any sense in India, and they adore Prime Minister
Narendra Modi, who follows one of them on Twitter.

Amrita Bhinder was until recently a tax lawyer with a corporation in
Gurugram but she quit the lucrative job, she says, for health reasons.
She has been a diabetic since early adolescence. But she has the swag of
a healthy Punjabi athlete. “A fun thug,” she describes herself soon
after she walks into the restaurant where servers in short black dresses
are buzzing about this Sunday afternoon. She has snuck in her own wine
in a plastic bottle. Bhinder tweets often and late into the night. She
is a perpetual stream of news that shows a world ruined by liberals.
Last year, journalist Barkha Dutt threatened on Twitter to sue her for
sharing a link that claimed Dutt had helped terrorists in Kashmir.
Bhinder, of course, made the most of it. Her response to Dutt’s threat
received nearly 5,000 retweets.

The other woman at the table is a fiction writer and co-creator of one
of the most popular Hindi films in the last five years. She did not wish
to be named because, she said, she wanted to be “below the radar”, but
the fact is that she did not trust me to show her in a good light. She
is one of the many lady admirers of the male monastery called the
Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS). She is so awestruck by its most
famous bachelor, Modi, that she does not take his name. She only refers
to him as “Prime Minister”. “Say ‘Modi,” I tell her. “The Prime
Minister,” she says.

There is a perception that the left is a natural place for any Indian
woman, especially the urbane. The left, after all, is a late invention
to tame human nature. It celebrates vulnerabilities, laments atrocities
and flogs wounds. The right is chiefly preoccupied with the preservation
of home and race, hence it rates order above freedom, which is a form of
disorder.

Even though they do not realize it, most people are drawn helplessly to
either the left or the right. Among the women I have spoken to, who are
drawn to the right and are sane, there is a strong sense of home and
community, but they also have respect for liberal values because they
are beneficiaries of those innovations that have diminished the power of
men. Also, in a generalization, they have not been colonized by the
power and beauty of Western arts. Most of them did begin their adult
lives with no strong political views but then two major factors appear
to have tipped them. A crush on Modi, and bitter personal experiences
with some liberals.

The screenwriter, in fact, was deeply affected by both. She was,
initially, only curious about Modi. When an opportunity arose to see him
at an air-conditioned hotel banquet, she ensured she went. In that
function, which I too had attended, Modi said: If you are going to
negotiate a land deal with villagers, don’t wear “suit and tie”; once,
when he went to meet Manmohan Singh, “nobody spoke…then only I was
talking”; on the border between India and Pakistan, the nature of the
desert soil ensures that the fence keeps falling, so India must build a
border made of solar panels. As she heard him speak, she thought he was
not so bad at all.

A few days later, she was at a party at the home of Congress member of
Parliament Shashi Tharoor. She got chatting with an acquaintance, a
humanities professor. When the screenwriter said she was impressed with
Modi, the professor “began screaming at me, screaming. She tried to
educate me. She was just screaming. It was humiliating”.

At the time, this was the screenwriter’s social set. She came to know of
many women like her who found it hard to accept the fundamentalism of
the leading liberals but chose to keep quiet, “because if you speak your
heart, especially if you happen to like the Prime Minister, then
suddenly you don’t have friends”.

For some, the drift towards the right began not because of a stray
liberal but out of disgust for the Congress party. “My hatred started
with Indira Gandhi,” says Bhinder, who comes from an army background.
“She and her party always undermined the army. Always tried to humiliate
it. So more than right wing, I am a Congress-hater and a Modi-lover.”
She also despises the Congress for its appeasement of Muslims. She has
read all the major versions of the Quran and believes that the holy book
should be made mandatory reading for “all the citizens of the world” for
reasons that Muslims would not be delighted to hear. But, she accepts,
most Muslims take humanity more seriously than scripture.

At the moment, Bhinder is distracted by her phone. She chuckles, and
shows it to me. “Your Apple ID is being used to sign into a device near
New Delhi,” the message says. Such elementary hacking attempts occur
five or six times a day, she says. She has lost control over her phone a
few times. Sometimes she gets a call from a man who claims he is a
policeman and is on his way to arrest her. Who is doing this? She says
that Pakistani’s spy force, ISI, has set up a network in India to
intimidate people like her, “even though I am a nobody”.

Shilpi Tewari, the architect and social media figure who was in the news
last year after she was suspected of doctoring videos that showed
Jawaharlal Nehru University students uttering seditious things, “knew
nothing about politics” until the anti-corruption movement began. She
liked Arvind Kejriwal, now Delhi chief minister, until he entered
politics. “I now think he is worse than Sonia and Rahul Gandhi and
anyone else in politics.”

This is a common reaction among Modi’s admirers. Some place in their
subconscious sees Kejriwal as the real political threat to Modi. She, of
course, is a fan of Modi. She was one long before this February, when
she saw an image in which he was wearing a blue stole and tweeted that
she wanted it. In a few hours, he had it delivered to her house. She is
not among those women who would be terrified that Modi knows where she
lives.

She says that the defining quality of women who support the Bharatiya
Janata Party is that they are “practical and rooted in the system”. They
are never surprised by India because their values belong here.

Elsewhere, there is a section of liberal women, most of them married,
with children, who are changing. They tell me they have developed a
contempt for the sexual revolutions of their single friends because they
consider them phoney. They are amused and annoyed by those women who
maintain public postures of strength, while pleading with men for love
and marriage in private. One of them, who watches with no confusion as
women in her neighbourhood stand in their balconies and throw rose
petals over platoons of marching RSS men, has told me on several
occasions that there are very modern and sophisticated women, including
her, who are developing very conservative views about how young women
should be, views that would bring a smile to the face of Sushma Swaraj.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People.

The writer tweets at @manujosephsan
