# What do idealists want?

*2017-12-16*

There is an Indian melancholy all through the film An Insignificant Man.
At first it is hard to understand this familiar ache. It is odd because
the documentary on the famous victory of the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP),
which was released in cinemas after demands by the censor board were
fought off, ends in a happy place, when the small good guys beat the
giant practical villains.

So, is it the bare sight of Indian politicians that makes us sad, those
men with cunning high-carb faces? Or is it the absence of joy in the
masses who gather, and the inevitability of their doom? But slowly we
accept that the sorrow emanates from the very hero, Arvind Kejriwal,
once the beloved of all.

It is there in his deep seriousness; there when he tells the poor that
he will change their lives; when party workers high on morality argue
with him over how their voices are not heard while choosing electoral
candidates and he tells them that he too has the right to speak; and
when someone throws ink at him and he looks baffled. And in the end when
he triumphs and his fans carry him, and it is then that he looks
frightened and he blurts out the beautiful line that he is just “an
insignificant man".

What exactly does Kejriwal want? Is his wish for the welfare of humans
more than what most of us feel, or does he want them to transform in a
particular way that he approves of? Is his humanitarian mission the
promotion of a personal interpretation of welfare? Is he an idealist, or
merely a very good man? Only the naïve will think the two are the same.

When Kejriwal left the low-stakes world of activism and entered
electoral politics vowing to be naïve, the old guard laughed. In the
film, a Congress politician takes a dig at Kejriwal and says idealists
are good for a fling but make lousy husbands.

From his statements and his actions so far, what Kejriwal wants is to
create a political system that is under immense pressure to be clean so
that the people who are dependent on the government for their very
existence will have better lives. What is idealistic about this? Only in
India and other corrupt nations will someone like him be called an
idealist. But then a person is what he is in his circumstance. As the
bar in India is low for clean politics, we can consider Kejriwal an
idealist, but one, like Barack Obama, whose objectives are clear and
sane.

There is another idealist in the film, Yogendra Yadav, a former member
of AAP, who emerges from the story as a man more pious than Kejriwal. He
has presented himself to the cameras of the film-makers with greater
cunning than Kejriwal. There are several scenes where Yadav has his
palms covering his face in apparent frustration when the party faces
accusations of corruption. In one comical shot, he is clearly posing for
the camera, covering his eyes as we hear hostile television news in the
background. A man who always knows where the cameras are, he maintains
the appearance of some superior outsider trying to save a bumbling
outfit. Many reviewers of the film have considered Yadav, who is
verbally articulate, to be the hero of the film, which is similar to the
admiration of Nehruvian sportswriters for Rahul Dravid.

What does Yadav want? He is in the classical mould of an idealist. What
he appears to want is primarily to transmit the fact that he is
idealistic. His allegiance is to the perception of him. It is a common
personality type upon whom a beer bottle will fall if you fling it on a
congregation of artists, academics and posh boys who write long-form.

Most idealists are usually from the social and economic elite but feel
inadequate in a changing world, or in a society where it has suddenly
become expensive to remain rich, a price they cannot afford any more.
Idealists formed by such economic forces are not charlatans. They may
not accept their social dejection as the cause but they really do seek a
noble activist goal, they get obsessed by a glorious thought experiment
that can never be a reality, a pursuit that then becomes a war against
their more successful adversaries. Usually, this happens among the
middle-aged, but of late we see many young people, terrified by their
low chances in capitalism, seeking refuge in idealism, where they
finally gain respect.

The most powerful idealists are a bit complex. They are often elite
victims of insults from another group of elites. Their revenge is
harvested through idealism. This is the Gandhian touch to idealism. In
the book The South African Gandhi: Stretcher-Bearer Of Empire, authors
Ashwin Desai and Goolam Vahed say that in 1893, when Gandhi considered
himself among the elite of South Africa, he wrote a letter that stated:
“I venture to point out that both the English and the Indians spring
from a common stock, called the Indo-Aryan.... A general belief seems to
prevail in the Colony that the Indians are little better, if at all,
than savages or the Natives of Africa. Even the children are taught to
believe in that manner, with the result that the Indian is being dragged
down to the position of a raw Kaffir." And, in 1904, he wrote that the
Johannesburg municipal council “must withdraw the Kaffirs (blacks) from
the Location. About this mixing of the Kaffirs with the Indians, I must
confess I feel most strongly. I think it is very unfair to the Indian
population and it is an undue tax on even the proverbial patience of my
countrymen."

We will never know the exact constellation of factors that led him on
the path to modern greatness but it would be naïve to presume that white
racism that did not fully acknowledge his brown racism had no role at
all.

The celebrity of some idealists in our parts is entirely the creation of
an ignorant West’s feudal compulsion to distribute good-behaviour
awards, like the Nobel Prize. Aung San Suu Kyi, as we now realize, is
among them. She is a Bamar, the Brahmins of Myanmar, who also constitute
a majority among the many ethnicities of the nation. Her father was
among the most influential Burmese leaders ever. Suu Kyi, very simply,
is from an elite class that fought her oppressors using the full force
of idealism, which includes the propagation of a political system that
favours her and gives her an unfair advantage over the common Burmese.
But the Western acclaim-distribution system saw in her everything it
wanted to see in the “other people"—a suave, English-speaking, beautiful
female who was very Western but Burmese. This is very similar to how the
US space agency Nasa searches for extraterrestrial life—something made
of carbon that is dependent on water, or something that is human but a
bit exotic.

Now that Suu Kyi is part of the government, of the system, she has no
patience for humanitarian posturing. She has refused to accept that
there was “a genocide" of Rohingya Muslims. Usually, people who win the
Nobel Peace Prize do not deny a genocide when The New York Times
suggests there was one. Instead, to the horror of the global good guys,
she suddenly appears to be a conservative hardliner.

Like Suu Kyi, Arvind Kejriwal ceased to be the beloved of a class when
he became something more than a gadfly, when he became the system. The
same will happen to Kanhaiya Kumar, the world’s most famous “student
leader", the reason why he does not become an adult. When an idealist
begins to succeed and becomes useful, he ceases to be one. The romantic
then steps out of the circle of adoration to do something more difficult
than merely be lovable.  
  
Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.  

He tweets @manujosephsan
