# Activism as a ‘Blue Whale Challenge’

*2017-08-26*

We are told that there is a game called the Blue Whale Challenge, that
it originated in Russia and has now spread to many nations; that the
game has infected an unknown number of teenagers who play by joining
chat rooms on the internet and accepting assignments from the shadowy
curators of the groups; that each player is given 50 tasks, most of
which involve self-harm; and that the final task is suicide. We are told
that the Blue Whale Challenge is responsible for hundreds of suicides,
including many in India in the past few days alone. This is in line with
the argument that the reason for suicide resides outside the person who
has committed suicide.

We have been told that poverty pushes farmers to kill themselves;
eviction from a college makes a Dalit kill himself; and that stress
kills Indian students. These are false and dangerous ideas.

“Suicide is complex. There are almost always multiple causes, including
psychiatric illnesses, that may not have been recognized or treated,"
says a cautionary note that was prepared in 2015 by a group of
organizations from many nations, including the American Foundation for
Suicide Prevention and the National Institute of Mental Health. The note
states, “Mental disorders and/or substance abuse have been found in 90%
of people who have died by suicide." The note, “The Recommendations For
Reporting On Suicide", which derives its moral confidence from dozens of
studies and reflects the conclusions of thousands of research papers, is
a directive to journalists. “Avoid reporting that death by suicide was
preceded by a single event, such as a recent job loss, divorce or bad
grades. Reporting like this leaves the public with an overly simplistic
and misleading understanding of suicide," the note says, adding without
any ambiguity, “Report on suicide as a public health issue." It
discourages “describing recent suicides as an ‘epidemic,’
‘skyrocketing’, or other strong terms".

Almost every suicide is inherently a mental health story. The social or
economic causes, including those mentioned in that most unreliable yet
overrated of documents—the suicide note—might be triggers, but they are
triggers only in a particular type of people. Suicide is, even when
committed by a poor Indian farmer or a dejected Dalit boy or an urban
teenager, primarily a psychiatric matter. But there is a whole
confederation of ideologues who promote the idea that suicides are
crimes perpetrated by people whom the ideologues despise.

Last year, after Dalit scholar and activist Rohith Vemula hanged
himself, his friends and other activists cast the suicide as the result
of harassment by an upper-caste cartel that ran the university, which
had evicted him for his political activities. Soon, this view was
reflected by the entire liberal establishment and by the mainstream
media.

Vemula was a highly vocal activist. If his death was a result of mental
torture, he would have made much of it in his suicide note. He did leave
an anguished note, but absolved everyone of responsibility. Activists,
however, insisted that his death had nothing to do with mental issues,
which Vemula himself had alluded to in his note: “I feel a growing gap
between my soul and my body."

It was as though a Dalit was not allowed to be depressed. In his final
letter, he had said, “The value of a man was reduced to his immediate
identity...." It appeared that even his death was reduced to just that.

What if the hysteria of political activism around his death hid the
actual circumstances of his death? What if he was dejected not only by
the upper-caste cartel but, as he hints in his suicide note, also by the
very people he belonged to? What if the perpetual negativity of activism
worsened his depression? What if his doom began with his decision to
abandon microbiology, despite his dream of becoming a science writer,
and taking up sociology just because he was interested in society? What
if he had received better advice, what if someone had cared enough to
tell him that the humanities are luxury streams in which the rich and
the suave do better than the poor? What if the very mourners were the
actual triggers of his death? What if a complex suicide was reduced to a
simple cause of a simple effect? And what if thousands of depressed
Dalit students were taking cues from the melodramatic media coverage of
his death and seeking heroic ends to their miseries? This is precisely
why “The Recommendations For Reporting On Suicide" nudges journalists to
be more scientific than political or emotional while reporting suicides.

The most successful myth of activism, though, is the idea of “farmer
suicides", the simplistic notion that poverty and debt drive farmers to
kill themselves. This is a very important and passionate view of many
rural activists because the hypothesis of farmer suicides shames urban
capitalism, and can be used selectively to condemn any political party.

There can be no dispute that most Indians in the agrarian economy are in
perpetual economic despair but the presumption that they would kill
themselves without being guided by a powerful psychiatric state is plain
ludicrous. Apart from the opinion of psychiatrists, and the empirical
results of numerous studies, there are many pieces of statistics that
seriously question the popular idea of farmer suicide. According to
National Crime Records Bureau figures for 2015, the suicide rate of
“farmers and agricultural workers", at 4.5 per 100,000, is way below the
national average of 10.6. This has been the story over the past 15
years, a period when activists and the media successfully branded
“farmer suicide" as a special form of suicide.

In fact, the Indian farmer is less likely to commit suicide compared to
more affluent groups in India and other parts of the world. Also, the
number of male farmers who commit suicide is many times higher than
female farmers. This skewed ratio is similar to a pattern observed in
many countries for suicides. In many regions, men who complete suicide
outnumber women. The fact that Indian farmers, too, exhibit this trend
appears to suggest that unique Indian triggers may be subordinate to
more fundamental universal reasons for why people kill themselves.

A consequence of the myth of “farmer suicide" is that politicians are
disbursing aid to farmers. The altruism of simpletons is not useless but
it usually does not solve anything. What India’s vast but shrinking
agrarian society needs is a serious and urgent mental healthcare system.
But then when a lie is popular, and sacred, when a wrong diagnosis is
made by the elite for ideological reasons, the solutions are farcical.
And, it is possible that thousands of farmers, who were depressed, who
were on the brink, were inspired to kill themselves because activists
and the news media created conditions that were conducive for the
Werther effect, or Copycat Suicides, a phenomenon in which people who
are suicidal construe highly publicized or glorified suicides as
endorsement of the act.

In the Blue Whale Challenge, there is one person in the chat room who is
not expected to kill himself—the curator. Among the suicide squads of
terror groups, too, the handler is the one who does not die. People who
misrepresent a suicide as a political tragedy instead of what it is in
its core—a psychiatric action—are not very different from those handlers
who persuade the weak to die while staying alive to recruit more to die
for a cause.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
