# Is storytelling only a cunning trick?

*2017-09-08*

One day I went to meet a mind reader. He could read that I did not
believe anyone could read minds but the young Israeli, Lior Suchard, was
known across the world for his paranormal powers. In 2011, former US
president Bill Clinton was in the audience and Suchard asked Clinton to
think of a two-digit number, which Suchard then guessed correctly as
“61", which has to be the most useless thought to extract from Clinton.
But Suchard is often very impressive. In fact, Clinton, he said, wanted
him to be deployed against Iran to steal the thoughts of Iranians.

When I first saw Suchard, in 2013, he was conducting a “corporate
workshop" in Gurugram. Many of the participants were managers from
Nokia, which had paid over Rs16,000 per mind to listen to Suchard. It is
not a price a corporation would pay its executives to attend a magic
show in the middle of a weekday but then the story Suchard had spun
around himself was that he had mental powers that most people did not
possess. He could also bend spoons with his mind, he said (so can I, as
several little children would attest).

I asked Suchard, “What is the most important thing you know about
people?"

“They want to believe," he said.

Everybody tells stories. Only some who do are called storytellers. In
fact, the people who are paid the most for their stories are probably
not known as storytellers at all, just as the most successful magicians
are not known as magicians. All famous people are famous stories
themselves. Apart from religion, culture and diets, most products and
product lines, and many industries too, are largely creations of
stories. There are origin stories of billionaires—that exact but
fictitious moment when an insight struck; there are totally false
stories; half-truth stories; white-lie stories; and cute stories about
the flaws of brilliant people.

There is a common perception that stories are tricks, or they contain
tricks. Life is mostly banal, reality mostly boring, and because the
only objective of a story is to be interesting, the world accepts that
stories have to be somewhat charlatan to succeed. Not just advertisers
and politicians, but others, like businessmen, psychologists, popular
scientists and activists, too feel it is important to trick, lie or
exaggerate or not tell the whole truth to achieve an influential story.
That white toothpaste makes teeth whiter; that fat is worse than sugar;
that there is such a thing as a black hole; that machines will take over
the world, are all very successful stories of modern times that exploit
powerful human emotions or ignorance.

This form of storytelling shares its principles with the timeless rules
of telling a pulp fiction or a commercially viable story, chiefly these:
“Give people want they want"; “Promote popular beliefs and never
challenge them"; and “Know your audience so that you can pander to
them".

But there is an entirely different form of storytelling, a very
difficult kind of craft. It is what is widely known as literature or
art. Nobody can define art but most people would agree that there is an
exalted place for integrity in it. There is an expectation of the world
that in literature the storyteller may fabricate a story while still
saying only what he or she truly means to say. This may not always be
true. Some literary novels, for instance, are not even stories in the
first place: They are banality couched as anthropology. And they can be
dishonest too. The novelist Marlon James said, soon after he won the Man
Booker Prize in 2015, that authors of colour tend to “pander to white
women" as the rewards for such pandering are immense. There might be
some fake writers but there can be no doubt that integrity is sacred in
artistic storytelling. Despite that, when taken at its peak, art is
thrilling and transformative in a way pulp cannot match.

Can corporations and other major storytellers derive powerful techniques
of storytelling from art?

Robert McKee, a popular American tutor of storytelling who also trains
business executives to tell stories about their companies and brands,
said in an interview to the Harvard Business Review that a story is,
among other things, a set of answers to the questions the storyteller
has set out to solve. “Finally," he says, a good storyteller, “leans
back from the design of events he or she has created and asks, ‘Do I
believe this? Is it neither an exaggeration nor a soft-soaping of the
struggle? Is this an honest telling, though heavens may fall?’"

Some of the most successful corporate stories today are much closer to
the principles of artistic storytelling than to Dan Brown. The legend of
Steve Jobs, for instance, is an account of his fierce independence and
his war against majoritarian ideas. Many of his crucial characteristics
as an entrepreneur were closer to those of an artist. His faith in his
own instinct, for instance, and his contempt for market surveys. Jobs
also showed that it is possible to have a high regard for the world—that
people will appreciate an uncompromising work of art—and still succeed.
He also used the most unsung artistic talent—the power of conjecture. He
did not seek opinions from the world because it does not always know
what it wants. He demonstrated that the autocracy of artistic creators
can conjure up an object that can sell in millions, and that the Apple
way can coexist with the Samsung way of doing things, which worships the
democracy of market surveys.

A few days ago, Russian President Vladimir Putin, in a talk to students
in his country, said the nation that becomes the leader in Artificial
Intelligence “will become the ruler of the world". Tesla chief executive
officer Elon Musk tweeted his response: “It begins". Coming from Musk,
this was an effective but deeply felt dramatic device as he tries hard
to push his idea that the world should be wary of Artificial
Intelligence, and about the stupidity of smart machines. Musk is a
storyteller in the mould of Steve Jobs, who knows the power of a story
but is unafraid of discarding artifice and telling his story the way he
wants to.

To tell a powerful story, we need to believe in our own stories.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of the
forthcoming Miss Laila, Armed And Dangerous
