# A brief review of envy

*2017-11-25*

Over the past two decades, during chats, I have slipped in a line that
is widely attributed to the writer Gore Vidal: “Whenever a friend
succeeds, a little something in me dies." Sometimes I use another
aphorism that is attributed to him, “It is not enough to succeed. Others
must fail."

Like the villain who tests a gas mask to check not if it works but if it
fails, I use Vidal not to find out who laughs but to see who does not.
Only children don’t, and that is not because they are angelic but
because they do not find truth funny, yet. I have not met an adult who
does not at least chuckle, and some do look as though half their
biographies have been told by those lines. I have used Vidal during
formal speeches too, and told the audience, not entirely in jest, “I
knew you jerks will find it funny".

We can argue that it is not envy that is evil, but what people choose to
do when motivated by it. But then people do not always see or accept
what envy makes them do. Mothers who embarrass their young daughters out
of envy, spilling their secrets for instance, do give the sin much
grander names. How then must we deal with the envy of those who love us?

A colossal mistake I made in my late adolescence and through my 20s was
to perceive envy as evidence of hatred. My own, and the envy of others.
Boys typically masqueraded insults as jokes to humiliate the close
friends they envied, or they bad-mouthed them. Such behaviour was, in my
view, an unpardonable sin. Now I see that it was a poor analysis of
envy, which cost me thousands of hours of companionship.

Some philosophical apologists of envy would say that envy is a form of
affection, which I think is nonsense, but what is hard to dispute is
that people can love a person and at once be envious, and even act in
mildly malicious ways. In response we should develop the humour to
forgive. Envy is a natural derivative of the most important quality of
friendship—equality.

The ancient Greek poet Hesiod in Works And Days says that envy is
primarily between equals. He writes, as translated by Hugh G.
Evelyn-White, “…potter is angry with potter, and craftsman with
craftsman, and beggar is jealous of beggar, and minstrel of minstrel."

Across the ages, many writers and philosophers, including Aristotle,
Bertrand Russell and David Hume, have stumbled upon the insight or
plagiarized from ancient greats that envy is a fault line among equals.
At first glance, the hypothesis seems obvious.

I remember when I was in college, students from second-rung engineering
colleges wished harm on those from the Indian Institutes of Technology
(IITs). There was, of course, tongue-tied adoration that led to bizarre
exchanges:

“Do you believe in God?" one second-rung engineering boy asked an
IITian.

“Yes."

“What a coincidence, even I believe in God."

But the same devout also hated the IITians and maliciously scorned their
rubber slippers and their disorientation in the presence of girls.
Literature students, like me, who did not appear to have any prospects
at all and whose future was far more bleak than that of the second-rung
engineering boys, did not envy the IITians. We got along very well. Only
those who were and would once again in the material world be in
competition with the IITians envied them. Envy, it appeared, was not a
consequence of deprivation, but a thing among peers.

This is the same principle that is behind why contemporary Indian
novelists, when asked to name their favourite Indian writers, usually
name R.K. Narayan or Kiran Nagarkar. The two writers are beyond
competition, beyond the grouses of peers. This is also the reason why
Indian literary awards do not make any sense. The jury, which usually
consists of writers and academics with moderate success, tend to reward
debutants or provincial unknowns, who are not equals, or literary
superstars, who again are not equals. A literary jury made up of hugely
successful writers, with a high threshold for envy, would throw up a
very different set of award winners.

The best thing about success is that it reduces the number of people you
would envy.

Envy is not a tribute. There is in fact an insult encoded within
envy—that the envious think they are as good as you and that if they
were only as lucky as you, they would have received your success.

Envy is inert in some people, murderous in others. There is a view among
modern philosophers that there is good envy and bad envy. Hesiod is
probably the originator of this view. He states the verse that I have
quoted earlier, “potter is angry with potter…", in the context that envy
can motivate people to better themselves. In The Symposium, Plato says
that a poet who is envious of a more successful poet might be motivated
to write better poems. I find this hard to accept. Every writer attempts
to write the best he can every time he sits to write. You cannot watch
the success of other writers, spit on your hands, slap your thighs and
say now you are going to write something great. It does not work like
that. Knowingly or unknowingly what people actually envy in others is
the same as what they adore—luck.

There have been many other scholarly attempts to project envy as
something more reputable than it appears to be. The Roman philosopher
Marcus Tullius Cicero wrote, “Compassion and envy are consistent in the
same man; for whoever is uneasy at anyone’s adversity is also uneasy at
another’s prosperity." The way I read this statement, he is arguing that
envy is empathy gone rogue. This then is the most honourable explanation
why compassionate liberals are also so often bitterly jealous people.

On the other end of the intellectual spectrum is Chanakya, who defames
envy. He says “only lazy and poor people" develop envy, and that
“prostitutes envy loyal women, and widows envy married women". This is,
actually, the popular view of envy—that people who long for something
envy those who possess it. Yet when we think about the matter we can see
that it is not as convincing as the view that envy is primarily a
tension between equals. A prostitute may wish she were not one, but she
is more likely to be envious of a more beautiful prostitute than a woman
who is not in the trade.

But Chanakya might be right when envy is viewed in a particular way.

Let us first consider a question: Do the poor envy the rich?

We are trained to believe they do. Chanakya would say they do. But then
this hypothesis can be demolished by another question: Do you envy
Mukesh Ambani? I can guess the answer. Hesiod, we can see, was
right—people are more likely to envy their colleagues more than their
billionaires. But Chanakya is vindicated when we consider the fact that
there is a distinction between private envy and social envy.

In social envy, we envy people we do not know personally, we do not envy
them as individuals but as a collective. Democracy has empowered this
form of envy. In fact, electoral democracy is a process of venting our
social envies. In an election, the potter does not envy potter; they
collaborate and attempt to trounce those whom they envy, those who claim
they are “shining".

But most of the time, we live in the personal. And may I suggest the
most efficient way to harm your foes. No plotting, no retribution. Just
do very well.  

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

@manujosephsanlounge@livemint.com
