# How boy (really) gets girl

*2017-03-23*

The hero of Badrinath Ki Dulhania is a young man who does not know what
compound interest is. In fact, he does not know what simple interest is.
Even though his father owns a car dealership, where he works, he is
unaware that ABS stands for anti-lock braking system. All of the world’s
acronyms or abbreviations are unfamiliar to him. Apart from the Taj
Mahal, he does not know the other wonders of the world as decided by
white people. He looks like the sort of muscular man who can make his
breasts quiver at will, and rate that highly as talent. He has an idiot
man-friend whom he loves and they often walk with their little fingers
locked. He is unemployable, short-tempered, and lives in Jhansi, which
he does not wish to flee. He is an obedient son because his father is
rich, a condition that is often passed off as an Indian family value.
Yet, in the end, the boy secures the love of an exceptional girl.

She is beautiful and dominant. At weddings she dances in the Hum Aapke
Hain Koun way that leads men to sing to her buttocks, but what she
really wants is to start her own business. She lives in Kota in the type
of beautiful house producer Karan Johar wishes, for aesthetic reasons,
every lower middle-class Indian would possess. Her home is a happy place
but she wishes to flee to make something of her life. She can speak
English fluently and is familiar with words like “claustrophobia". She
recognizes her suitor from Jhansi as an imbecile. In the end, he does
not transform into a clever man, there is no situation that he overcomes
through force of character, he does nothing heroic, but she falls in
love with him.

There are Indian stories where a man wins the affection of a woman
because he is extraordinary. And there are stories where a man is so
fortunate when he is unremarkable, or, worse, a wreck. In most of
mainstream Indian cinema, the boy is stricken by the beauty of the girl
and some other qualities, including talent and intellect, but it is
usually not clear what the girl sees in the hero. That Devdas was
written by a Bengali does not explain the attraction of a total loser
and why women must love him. Badrinath…, in fact, is puzzling in its
deliberate portrayal of the boy as not merely unremarkable but
exceedingly stupid, with no redeeming prospects. It is a type of
carelessness that Hollywood usually avoids—the boy in La La Land, for
instance, is a jazz romantic and some sort of struggling puritan
pianist, highly admirable features in a man who also resembles Ryan
Gosling.

We dismiss the emptiness of the Indian hero as part of the artistic
mediocrity of commercial cinema. But what if it is not a flaw at all?
What if the unremarkable man as the most common recipient of love is
closer to the truth? What if the typical modern Indian hero is, in fact,
sheer anthropology?

The love of a girl, with its exaggerated compliments, long, fond stares
and promise of decadence, is generally presumed to be a reward for
distinguishing male qualities. It is an idea that women themselves have
promoted through the many ways in which they talk of romance and the
loud expectations they have from men, which physically and
intellectually disqualify most men. That is the reason I went through my
entire late adolescence confused by the lovers the adorable girls took.
As it is, I could not understand how women could be in love with men who
were not writers, or at least scientists and other kinds of artists (but
not the postmodern kind). And how could all of them laugh so easily in
the company of their men when most men were not funny at all?

In the real world, love occurs for the simplest reason, that it is very
desperate to happen, and because it cannot wait it tends to reward not
the extraordinary but the available. As Eartha Kitt sang: Doesn’t have
to be prince or movie star/A Texas oilman or a French marquis/Doesn’t
have to be handsome as a picture/An ordinary guy’s all right with me.

An exceptional quality of the ordinary is that it is ubiquitous. Like in
a Hindi film, a guy in the right place at the right time has a better
chance than the invisible prophesied genius titan. The regular guy is in
the right place at the right time because he is up and about most times
even as his formidable competition is hidden in solitary confinement
working long hours on heroic dreams. He is most often not the brilliant
coder or artist or scientist or athlete and does not have to spend a
colossal amount of time nurturing his gifts. And he probably exhibits
signs of appealing goodness because as an ordinary person he, rightly,
believes he needs the backing of people, so he has a natural tendency to
reach out.

The exceptional young men, meanwhile, however attractive their talents
might be, may not be as agreeable as the ordinary. Or they might be too
proud to make the first move, or too scared of the shame of rejection.

In the language of love, there is much talk about the inexplicable
“connection" that two people discover, or the fiery “chemistry". This is
meant to explain why women choose regular guys when they could have been
with more gifted men. But we can never be sure how much of this
chemistry is influenced by the far less glorious circumstances of the
players involved or how much of this is in reality plain misconceptions
or delusions that people wish to surrender to because they are tired of
loneliness. And there is the matter of equal handicaps.

In the satire The Lobster, director Yorgos Lanthimos creates a
fictitious world that is somewhat familiar: An oppressive society
expects everyone to find love within a certain period, or they will be
converted into animals of their choice. “If you encounter any problems
you cannot resolve yourselves," an official tells prospective couples,
“you will be assigned children, that usually helps."

In their desperate search for love to save themselves from becoming
animals, men and women who are handicapped in some form also search for
similar flaws in others. In the real world that the film parodies, love
is very rarely a match of the strong and often a union of equal
weaknesses. And there is much beauty in that.

It does not matter what creates it, there is such a thing as love. It is
our finest form of insanity, and we must not be too troubled by whether
its origins are sound at all.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People.
