# Are you a village, or a city?

*2017-06-24*

These days there is much love for farmers among people who do not meet
farmers. In their imagination, farmers are earthy, ancient and genuine,
like noble organic vegetables. In the English-language media, farmers
have attained the same status as “techies”—they are a flock of same
people to whom stuff happens.

Rich, poor, male, female, high-caste, Dalit, the Bihari farm worker and
Kannadiga planter, are all just farmers. And the farmers themselves have
caught on to this. In March, a group of Tamil farmers went to Delhi to
protest in green loin cloths and garlands made out of exhumed skulls
that they claimed belonged to farmers who had committed suicide. They
also held live mice and parts of dead snakes between their teeth to get
the attention of the prime minister so that he would waive their loans.
No other class of people could have gotten away with wearing human-skull
garlands and biting live mice, but they were farmers.

If poor farmers had not become the mascots of all farmers, they would
have been identified clearly as the primary foes of the urbane crowd.
Farmers, though scholars of the land, are the same entrepreneurs who
spray chemicals to make their produce look fresh. The rich among them
don’t pay taxes. They are the largest consumers of freshwater—irrigation
alone takes up over 80% of Indian freshwater, chiefly to grow high-carb
crops, like rice, that are heavily subsidized too. They also consume
free or cheap electricity. There is a more important reason why the
farmer is the natural foe of the liberal urbane—the farmer is a
villager.

In the villager live the instincts and compulsions of a primordial
tribal. He can survive only as part of the herd. As a result, identity
is everything to him. He must preserve caste, and social hierarchies,
and religious venoms, and the place of men over women. He might be an
oppressed man but to everybody who is below him, he is an oppressor too.
He cherishes a type of order that keeps the hierarchies in place. He
considers social order “tradition”, and civil disorder “freedom”.

B.R. Ambedkar had contempt for the Indian village. The liberation of
Dalits, he was clear, involved their liberation from the village. Urban
migration was then, as it is now, not merely about economics, but also a
pursuit of anonymity for those for whom identity is a curse.

The villager does not live in villages alone. In fact, cities have
become the more powerful bastions of the feudal village. Villagers fill
Parliament, the legislative assemblies and municipal bodies. They fill
government offices. They run big and small businesses too. They are in
the richest ghettos of Mumbai. Residences are segregated, even in
Mumbai, by community, religion and diet. Once I assumed the name of
“Mohammed Khan” and tried to rent a house in the plushest parts of south
Mumbai. It seemed impossible.

The village is not a place, it is a mind. We know men who study in the
best colleges in the US but the moment they return to India, they
transform into feudal lords because that is what they are and that is
what brings them peace. Equality takes away most of their social
fortunes. Many such feudal lords do not look like bad people at all. In
fact, they resemble reformers. They couch their wish to preserve their
privileges as a desire to preserve culture, heritage and traditions.
They are disturbed by the urbanization of rural spaces, and the creeping
ambiguity of social hierarchies. In protest, they romanticize the
village as though it is a part of geology that should never change.

The city, too, is a mind. It is planted in people who do not wish to
gain from their identity, or cannot gain from it; and people who have
the capacity to leave their herd. The true city person is someone who
can separate his family, which he may love, from the cultural shell that
houses the family. He may initially profit from the privileges of his
birth, but eventually wishes to break away. If the villager wants social
order and civil disorder, the city mind wants social disorder and civil
order. He is a cultural sponge who absorbs everything, and an
intellectual parasite who lives off the latest streams of knowledge
emanating from the most vibrant cities. “He” is often a she. A city,
after all, is a woman’s good friend. Not that women cannot be feudal, a
laughable thought.

The city mind is not always glorious, however. As the city imitates
dominant cultures of its time, it is often held in the sway of
impoverishing fancy ideas, like borrowed socialism and hollow political
correctness. Also, a club of unoriginal city minds who are besotted with
imported ideas are always at risk of becoming villagers themselves.

The battle for modernity is always the battle between the idea of the
village and the idea of the city. So who is winning?

Most people in the world are probably villagers. In this light, the city
has done very well. It has had a profound and disproportionate influence
over the world. It has framed progress as a migration from ancient times
to modern times. We must not take this sense of direction for granted.
It can collapse, as has happened in Afghanistan and Syria, and to a
degree, even in Mumbai. Society is then transported back by years or
decades or centuries.

The villagers are clawing back, especially the villagers who are
entrenched in the cities. All over the world, the meaning of rising
conservatism is that the village is fighting back. Prosperity has made
people fear losing what they have, and to feel secure they resort to the
mafiadom of large useful groups. They are doing what villagers are best
at—ganging up against people who are not like them.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
