# The war against Silicon Valley&#8217;s evil design

*2017-05-12*

We are addicted to anticipation. We check the phone many times every day
to see if anything good has happened. According to a study, an average
person checks his phone over 150 times a day. Some people unlock their
phones over 900 times a day. And, we go to Facebook to be famous “to 15
people”, in the analysis of former Facebook employee Antonio Garcia
Martinez, and to tolerate the good fortunes of others. And, there is
WhatsApp too, where extroverts have a bit more to say about themselves.

We waste time. It is a character flaw, but when millions have the same
flaw, it is also called human nature. The tech industry exploits our
nature and steals our time.

The smartphone is designed consciously to drain away time. Most of the
apps in it, especially social media and email, are designed to trap
people for hours every day. And a movement is gathering force to
liberate people from the phone, and to force Silicon Valley to adopt
more ethical designs.

At the head of the movement is Tristan Harris, former product
philosopher and “design ethicist” of Google, who advised the firm on how
not to exploit human flaws. He frames the most transformative triumph of
commercial design, the smartphone, as a casino “slot machine” because it
enslaves people through hope. Gmail, Facebook, Tinder and other apps
convert people into zombies who ask, in his opinion, “What am I going to
get, what am I going to get next?”

In his TED talk, which was inevitable for a slim, ethical and successful
American programmer, he said that every time we send a mail, even a work
mail, we interrupt someone who would take “23 minutes” to get back to
the interrupted task. In his talk, which was titled “How Better Tech
Could Protect Us From Distraction”, he said that because modern
distraction is a design problem, the solution would be in design. The
protection against email intrusion, for instance, is in designing a more
ethical mailing system, he said, where “Nancy” is allowed to switch on a
“focus mode” that would prevent emails from reaching her inbox. The
system can also be designed, he said, to let very important emails reach
her. Also, Apple can be persuaded to design a phone that would warn a
user that they have unlocked the phone over a dozen times in the past
hour.

Harris, who is earnest, clever, pious and self-righteous, wants all
designers in the tech industry to take a Hippocratic-like oath, swearing
to put ethics above business interests. He is among those who think the
opposite of greed is a monk in maroon robes. Not surprising then that he
once organized a meeting of monks and programmers. One of the monks
joked that instead of the “spellcheck” feature, programmers must code a
“compassion check”. Are such inanities in the real world better than
wasting time on Facebook?

In a short period of time, Harris has developed a reputation as the
conscience of the Valley. It is a stature that the Valley itself has
granted him. This is an unconscious defence mechanism of capitalism. It
hoists some folk heroes quickly so that more lethal revolutionaries do
not rise. The swift acceptance of its moral critics helps the Valley
sustain, remarkably, the perception that it is largely an ethical place.
Never in the history of capitalism has such a wealthy, exclusive and
profitable confederation of lucky men maintained this commercially
valuable reputation. Even so, Harris has begun to compare the tech
industry to the tobacco and processed food businesses. That is how he
blunts the most obvious argument against his movement—Aren’t people to
blame for their distractions?

The Turkish writer Orhan Pamuk once scoffed at writers who said they
could not finish their novels owing to distractions. He said, “Switch
off your phones” and write (the great Alice Munro would have grumbled to
herself, “Try raising children with the phone off”).

Harris is more sympathetic. He has suggested in his talks and news media
interviews that the plight of an average person in the connected world
is not very different from that of a smoker’s. A huge industry that
employs thousands of people and spends billions of dollars is working
very hard to keep us addicted. What chance do even the strong have? Even
ascetics check their phones these days. Millions use the phone even to
meditate.

The Valley profits immensely from the addiction. Global social media
advertising doubled in two years to $31 billion (around Rs2 trillion) in
2016, but this is a small fraction of what the eventual spending will
be. Some of the smartest minds in the world are working long hours to
convert human distraction into more money even more efficiently. Why
would the attention economy let us have our time back? That would be the
equivalent of soft-drink manufacturers stopping the use of sugar.

Harris believes that people would be willing to pay, say $7 a month, to
be part of a social network that does not use clever design to trap
people and sell their time to advertisers. His ultimate goal is “time
well spent”, which is also the name of the movement he co-founded. It is
based on the notion that if people do not spend time on tech
attractions, they would find something meaningful to do. He thinks that
almost anything in the real world is better than staring at a screen.
This is a popular overestimation of the physical world.

What is it that most people do most of the time? Everything considered,
if we were to arrive at the most probable human pose at a given time of
day, it would be of a person sitting by a window and staring at life.
This might seem meaningful today when people have become zombies on the
Web, but not long ago it was described as sloth. And what do most people
do for fun in the real world? A man encounters another man at a party
and says, “What’s up?”, the other one responds, “What’s up?”, and they
look around to see if there is anyone more interesting. Then they would
have ethanol with glucose and food that is, for all practical purposes,
sugar. And this would be, most probably, in the nighttime, which would
mean that they would wake up late next morning. This, too, is unhealthy.

Of course, there are healthier ways to meet people and very meaningful
ways to enjoy the company of friends and family. But then there are
healthier ways to enjoy social media too. Turn off the notifications,
visit Facebook only once a day, do not click on the cat videos, read
selectively and read Lounge. Harris, who himself does most of this, says
that the tech companies make such habits extremely difficult. But then
there are mammoth industries that make healthy fun and healthy eating
almost impossible. People distinguish themselves by overcoming the hell
that a majority has created. This is the way of the world.

Harris thinks that a world that has been enslaved by design aspires to
do much better things with its time. But perhaps he overrates the world.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of The Illicit
Happiness Of Other People.
