# Is objectivity actually a disorder?

*2017-10-28*

When people say “be objective", they usually mean, “agree with me". But
the world does know the meaning of objectivity. It is, in fact, a moral
goal, an expectation that society has from its most learned, most of
whom think they are highly objective. But there are only a few who
actually walk the middle path, which is a desolate road, and they are
not there because they are enlightened. They are there because they
cannot help it, they are made that way, they are afflicted with
disbelief. Objective people are a personality-type.

How might our age look to those who ail from innate objectivity? They
are probably like the lonely who gape at the festive commotion of other
people who so easily fit in; they see groups making circular formations
in cosy parties and holding uniform views about diverse subjects,
including organic vegetables, farmers, giant corporations, the equal
distribution of wealth, free markets, dangerous Muslims, sweet Muslims,
hydrocarbons or polar ice caps. The middle-path dwellers may often
wonder who is stranger: the rich who claim to be Marxists, or the broke
youth who claim to be capitalists.

Can people ever be the labels they give themselves? Can it be that
socialism and capitalism, like many other powerful ideas that have
names, are only thought experiments of dead eccentrics that the world
has taken too literally? The economist Amartya Sen told me in an
interview, about four years ago: “I don’t know what socialism means any
more, I don’t know what capitalism means. It is a complete waste of time
to discuss socialism and capitalism. Every successful economy in the
world will be a mixture of both. It is a question of balance you are
looking for. If it is the tipping point you’re looking for, it would be
the tipping point of terminology."

But in choosing where they belong, individuals do not depend on how well
an idea works in practice. They need to only ask how well it works in
theory.

There are immense social and professional advantages in belonging to an
ideological or intellectual camp. People make useful friends, they have
delightful conversations. They look around at their large tribes and
their biases find corroboration. They find clear political and economic
directions. They begin to answer the important question—about who they
really are—and the answer is collective and glorious.

Take, for example, India’s social elite who migrated to the US and
immediately became, in situations, the underclass, finding comfort in an
exaggerated love for their homeland. Or India’s sophisticated gentry,
including the Nehruvian old money, who have been eclipsed by new money,
who have lost their easy privileges and whose wealth has been devalued
by the higher threshold for the very definition of rich, who have sought
refuge in the moral guardianship of the poor and the weak. All defeats
and humiliations are today subsumed in collective biases.

A person afflicted with objectivity, on the other hand, has no relief.
Not for him the comfort of belonging to a group of people who can agree
on comforting lies. His arguments against the narratives of his tribe
are increasingly annoying to the other members and in time he is
isolated. The others on the middle path who know how to keep their mouth
shut are no less lonely. Also, in many important walks of life, the
middle path is, by its very nature, dull. The most popular journalists
and novelists and comedians, for instance, are those who have picked a
side.

Many who are on the middle path are, not surprisingly, misanthropes. As
this column has argued before, the modern misanthrope is not essentially
a person who hates humanity but one who may not wish to engage deeply
with too many of his species.

Also, the objective-personality-type can be detrimental to marital
peace. There are situations in a marriage when the pursuit of truth is
not as wise as blindly taking the side of the spouse.

One summer, at a restaurant in Spain, I heard an Indian woman whisper to
her husband that the white waitress was a racist. The foolish husband
disputed the claim based on the fine logic that the waitress was equally
unpleasant to everyone in the restaurant, and that what his wife found
repulsive was not racism but a demonstration of European social
equality, where a waitress can possess what is generally known as
“attitude". From there, the couple’s lunch was a disaster.

Outside emotional relationships, objectivity is revered. Maybe humans
worship objectivity because it can be used to rehabilitate lies, but the
social prestige of objectivity has resulted in farcical demonstrations
of the virtue. Most famously, India’s claim that it is secular. India
is, of course, not a Hindu nation the way Pakistan is Islamic, but
India’s idea of secularism is not the dismissal of god but, instead,
equal rights for all the gods.

Posturing objectivity is in the heart of some kinds if journalism in the
form of “balance", where to win the right to make a point you have to
nominally fabricate “the other side". You first patiently state a whole
lot of things you do not take very seriously, then rubbish them. As Jon
Snow says in Game Of Thrones, quoting his father, “Everything before the
word ‘but’ is horse shit."

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.
