# How the defamation of GMOs was achieved

*2018-05-26*

About twenty-two years ago, Mark Lynas did not know what “DNA" stood for
but he was still enraged by the new science of genetic engineering.
Around this time, when he first heard the word Monsanto, he thought it
had an evil ring to it, as though Satan himself had started the company.
Scientists were saying that genetically modified crops can survive
weeds, diseases and even natural calamity, and they can be more
nutritious and cheaper than conventional crops, and they will need far
less pesticides. But Lynas, who lived in Britain, saw evil in people
like scientists and corporate executives, who were far more successful
than him. He was a volunteer for the multinational activist organization
Greenpeace. Even though his knowledge of genetics was rudimentary, he
began to write alarmist articles about human beings in a lab altering
the genetic structure of plant species (“These are dangerous times
ahead..."). He wrote press releases for Greenpeace, and articles in the
news media that quoted the press releases he himself had written.

To put it very simply, Lynas was among the key activists who created and
contributed to the fear that would become the global hysteria against
genetically modified organisms (GMOs). If you are someone who hates GMOs
but cannot hold a conversation beyond 30 seconds on the subject, you are
in the sway of what Lynas and his friends began to do about two decades
ago.

One day he tried to steal the first cloned animal, Dolly the sheep, but
the plan failed because Dolly was with other sheep and they all looked
alike. There were more successful operations—one night he and his
friends slunk into a trial field of lush genetically modified corn, and
he hacked down plants. Another day, he threw a cheap supermarket sponge
cake at Bjørn Lomborg, author of The Skeptical Environmentalist, a
popular book that questioned the many assumptions of environmentalists.

For this act of facile self-righteousness, Lynas became popular among
people with “inner beauty", but something about his humiliation of
Lomborg bothered him, and eventually led to a startling event in 2013.
At the Oxford Farming Conference where a few senior ministers were among
the speakers, and Prince Charles, too, through a video uplink, Lynas
began his speech by recanting his stand on GMOs, and apologizing for
destroying their image. “I am also sorry that I helped to start the
anti-GM movement back in the mid 1990s.... As an environmentalist, and
someone who believes that everyone in this world has a right to healthy
and nutritious diet of their choosing, I could not have chosen a more
counter-productive path. I now regret it completely."

His book, Seeds Of Science, which released a few weeks ago, is about how
activists like him used ignorant ideals and deceit to achieve the
successful defamation of GMOs.

When he threw the sponge cake, he did not know why Lomborg was wrong;
only that he was. It was a matter of faith. Lynas began to study
scientific material to seek evidence that supported his convictions
regarding the environment and appeared to find it. The process of
studying scientific literature made him realize that he actually enjoyed
seeking knowledge to support his blind faith. But when he began to
search for evidence that GMOs were poison, he was confused. He realized
that there was no concrete scientific evidence. In time, he began to see
that it was a wronged science. Of course, some of his former friends and
thousands in the anti-GMO camp had a different view—that his soul had
been bought over by Monsanto.

As a defence of GMOs, Seeds Of Science does not have any new startling
facts. His arguments are widely known, and, in fact, not disputed even
by scientists who are suspicious of GMOs: When humans began to
domesticate plants and animals thousands of years ago, they began to
genetically modify life. Every grain and vegetable and fruit we consume
today has been altered from its wild ancestors. In fact, we will not be
able to consume the “real" banana. “Changing genes via laboratory
molecular techniques, the main subject of this book, is not much
different from conventional selective breeding," Lynas writes.

In the early 1970s, the formative years of the science of laboratory
genetic engineering, the first concerns were not raised by activists,
but by scientists. They said that we did not have a grasp on the effects
of GMOs on nature, and on humans. In 1981, James Watson, the
co-discoverer of the DNA double helix, said, “Might some of the new
genetic combinations that we would create in the test-tube rise up like
the genie from Aladdin’s lamp and multiply without control, eventually
replacing preexisting plants and animals...?" Such scientific concerns
were not very different from the fears surrounding nuclear technology,
or the more recent fears about radiation from cellphone towers, and the
colliders where high-energy particles are smashed to see what comes out
of the collision. Eventually, the scientific community began to accept
that there was reasonable evidence to suggest GMOs were safe for humans
and for earth’s natural vegetation, and everything that depended on it.
Watson himself was assured. “My position is that I don’t read
recombinant DNA as a major or plausible pubic health hazard...." But
activists stayed with the fear because they are in the business of fear.

In 2012, the American Association for the Advancement of Science board
issued a statement: “The science is quite clear: crop improvement by the
modern molecular techniques of biotechnology is safe." In mid-2016, in
an extraordinary letter that was eventually signed by 131 Nobel
laureates, or one-third of all living laureates (more than 100 of them
had won the Nobel for sciences), said the propaganda against GMOs by
organizations like Greenpeace is “a crime against humanity". The triumph
of activism is that these days scientists cannot profess love for
science without attributing it to some grand noble cause. Not
surprising, then, that the Nobel laureates had special interest in a
theoretical but plausible type of GMO rice that would spawn
beta-carotene, a hydrocarbon that is a progenitor of vitamin A, a
crucial nutrient hundreds of millions among the world’s poor are
deficient in because of their inefficient grain diet.

But nothing scientists can say can abolish the fear that activists have
seeded across the world, including the myth that GMOs are carcinogenic.
Activists have, as Lynas shows in his book, continued to terrify people
by saying that the crops will give them cancer, and that everyone who is
supportive of GMOs has been bought over by Monsanto. Across the world,
the educated middle class is generally against GMOs. The fear is
primarily a belief that pretends to have a scientific explanation.

It is the good fortune of mobile technology and the Large Hadron
Collider that activists did not find the right circumstances to create
influential movements against them. Actually, in its early days, they
could have got the cellphone banned on the premise that we do not know
the effect of radiation emanating from cellphone towers. Also, there
were people who worried that the Large Hadron Collider could reduce
Earth to a black hole, but somehow they didn’t escalate the alarm.

Once people form an opinion, especially when the opinion becomes
publicly professed hatred, it is almost impossible to get them to
change. That is why I feel most evangelical writing is pointless. The
success of prose today lies in confirming the biases of people, not in
changing them.

What the successful defamation of GMOs should teach us is that
ultimately the battle is never between truth and lies, or science and
religion, but always between storytellers. A powerful story is always
about you. Activists often tell good stories because they talk about how
you will be affected, which is more influential than how you will not be
affected. Scientists get caught in facts and concepts, and they should
learn an important lesson from the cesspool of activism—never try to
tell a popular story without first creating a villain.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
