# In Madras, it was always summer

*2018-05-19*

At the time, when we were 16, I did not know he was schizophrenic; I
thought he was very close to enlightenment. We spoke a lot about why
Indians were more likely than other races to see the absolute truth. He
had a theory that white people were least likely to achieve nirvana
unless they roamed the tropics—because they wore too many clothes. The
cold of the West, he said, made them wear so many layers of garments
that they became self-absorbed in style, and as a result materialistic,
while Indians were trained to be austere because the weather did not
require them to think too much about clothes.

For some reason, we divided cultures into weather—chiefly, hot and cold.
I do not recall why we presumed that all nations had uniform and
unchanging weather when that was not true even for the northern part of
our own nation. We were familiar with the idea of seasons—as something
that happened to other people because in Madras (now Chennai) it was
always summer. That tired joke about the three seasons of Madras—“hot,
hotter, hottest"—was weird because we all knew it, yet we told each
other that. Somehow we did not know how to apply the knowledge of
seasons to the real world, especially when we made deep conjectures
about other cultures. Maybe we thought cold cultures were only “cold,
colder coldest". In the world that we knew, nothing ever changed in the
course of a mere year—the vegetables and the fruits were the same, and
so was the way people dressed. In fact, there was this scorn for people
who changed the way they dressed, or changed anything at all about
themselves, which was perceived as phoney behaviour. It is possible that
a tropical town, accustomed to perennial sights, had an exaggerated
respect for consistency.

In the time I spent in Madras, the first two decades of my life, from
the mid-1970s till the mid-1990s, the idea of escaping the weather was
not important to most of the middle class, nor was it economically
possible. Our rooms and public transport were not air-conditioned. Until
the age of 17, I was not acquainted with a single person who owned an
air conditioner. We sweated and smelled (of jaggery, I thought). Brides
sweated, grooms sweated; teachers, students, lovers, priests, thieves
and heroes—everyone had a film or a patch of sweat. In response, we were
bare most of the time. I read Midnight’s Children and P.G. Wodehouse,
and learnt to solve the cryptic crossword bare-chested, some days in a
lungi—and that did seem like a cultural anachronism. But the idea of
dressing up for an occasion somehow involved wearing foolish clothes.
Most Kanjeevaram silk saris are a glasshouse. Almost every Tamil film
had songs in which the hero wore jackets. Ordinary men, too, wore
sweaters because they thought they looked good in them. For a while,
every time I wished to dress well, for romantic reasons, I would wear a
black turtleneck—in 40 degrees Celsius heat and 100% humidity. The
dandies who attended church in sunglasses, too, wore two layers of
garments and they suspected they looked so dashing that they would puff
one cheek in embarrassment.

But there was such a thing as summer. It was a time that was hot even
for us. People quit wearing sweaters, though at least one boy wore a
black turtleneck on some days. The air was so heavy with moisture that
it was as though no breeze could blow it away. Life was hot and still
and in the evenings there was a great lethargic gloom in our hearts.
Water would cease to flow in the pipes and even the middle class had to
call for tankers, which were manned by the sidekicks of bottom-rung
politicians, all of whom had a special summer swag, as though the class
hierarchies had collapsed and they alone owned a vital resource.
Middle-executive men and their wives, children and servants stood on the
roadside with buckets. As adolescent boys, we were used as mules by
parents and neighbours. I mark that time through the visual of an
unfailing behavioural mechanism of boys trotting with two large vessels
of water and throwing glances at the balconies above for girls whose
purpose, we assumed, was to look on with admiration.

In the summers, some good fathers would take their families to Ooty for
a few days but mostly people went to temple towns that were hotter than
Madras. It was also a time when strange rustic grandparents visited
Madras and our colony saw apparitions that reminded me of communal
scenes in Star Wars. My own grandparents were the most conspicuous. The
enduring image of them is of the bare-chested old man from Kerala
walking down the cricket pitch with a jackfruit on his shoulder and his
tiny old woman strutting about in an ancient white costume that included
a fan-like object behind her. At first I was embarrassed, but then they
were so unusual I paraded them with pride.

But mostly we had nothing to do in the summers. We would sit on the
walls for hours wondering what to do. And we stared like villagers at
any passing sight. As a teenager trapped in Madras’s insufferable
summers, I began to go on long aimless walks across the city—in the peak
heat of day and in the dead of night. I walked miles every day. The
world appears to have forgotten that a walk can be pointless, that it is
not something that is invoked only to reach a destination, or to pamper
the heart after eating rubbish. The intense boredom of summers gave me
one lasting gift—an important part of my life today, as it was then, is
walking for no reason at all. I used to walk great distances at midnight
too, returning from films I watched alone. I almost never paid for the
tickets because I would enter the hall after intermission, when no one
checked. Madras at indecent hours was a strange place filled with men
who had a dark desperation on their faces. One night I discovered that a
bus went around the city carrying prostitutes and picking up men from
designated spots. I used to be stopped by policemen who wanted to know
what I was about. I would pretend that I did not know Tamil and speak to
them in English and they would lose interest in me. It was all so
simple.

Almost everything from that time has changed. Now the posh young people
of Madras do not look grotesque when they wish to dress up. They wear
very little. And it is easy to abolish the city’s heat. The middle class
does not sweat or smell of jaggery. The weather at a given point in time
in a room is like them, a global monoculture.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan
