# Escaping India within India

*2018-09-29*

One evening in a new club in Gurugram, as members began to trickle in,
some of them noticed an anomaly in the bar area. It was nothing jarring;
but something Indians notice in a fraction of a second when their eyes
sweep across a room. It was too abstract, and also improper, for the
members to discuss with their friends. But married couples are, in the
company of each other, racists and classists, and if you had good ears,
you may have heard their whispers and got a gist of things: a group of
happy young men around a table did not look suave enough to be a part of
the club which was meant for corporate heads (“Creative people are
interesting, but they don’t have money," the club’s co-founder told some
of us, correctly). It soon became evident that the young men at the bar
were indeed outsiders—they were the band for the evening.

The important quality of a private social club, the kind that is not a
metaphor but really a private social club, is that it is very honest
about its most important objective—to keep the other kind of Indians
out. The emergence of these new private clubs is a response to the
near-impossibility for the upper middle class of urban India to gain
admission into the legendary old clubs. In essence, the response of the
new rich to the high walls of the old rich is not the demolition of such
walls, but to build new swanky walls. That is human nature, and the
middle class is beginning to stop pretending that such a wish for social
islands where they can escape India for a few hours is debauched.

The very goal of the entire Indian upper class, in fact, is to escape
India within India. Our pursuit of the good life is automatically the
pursuit of islands. Affluent India is an archipelago of islands where
people pay a premium not for quality but for the invisibility of Other
Indians. Our residential colonies, schools, crèches, restaurants,
resorts, cars and cinemas are in reality clubs where the other Indians
can enter only as “servants".

Outside our islands, real India awaits. Roads are choked, air is poison,
sad urchins say they are hungry, beggars show their deformities, and
markets are filthy. But, India is too potent not to permeate the
islands, and it does as the odours of the drivers and the heart-breaking
stories of the maids who want a raise. And how much, in contrast to the
fulminations of island intellectuals, Aadhaar has transformed their
lives.

The Indian craving for social islands has only grown, driving up the
prices of anything that might offer mediocre services but promises
isolation from real India. Such islands are most successful and enduring
in the richest segments, where the islands themselves cannot be
purchased, they can only be inherited. Elsewhere, the islands are
ephemeral. In the past few years, there has been an economic
democratization of the nation and that has confused the social order in
many Indian spaces. About a decade ago, you could walk into any
five-star hotel and be confident of encountering only certain kind of
people. Today, you can find such a broad spectrum of Indians in the
lobby of a five-star hotel that you can recruit them as extras for not
only Karan Johar’s films but also Ram Gopal Varma’s. Soon after the
middle classes create a social island, the emerging classes quickly
infiltrate. Upmarket experiments, like condominiums, micro-breweries,
fusion food and literature festivals, have turned democratic and
plebeian in no time.

About two decades ago, the architect Hafeez Contractor told me that he
had a plan to create a giant meandering park, many miles long, along the
Mumbai coast which will be filled with grass-covered dunes, café and
theatres. He complained that the environmentalists were sabotaging the
plan. “It’s always about saving some bloody fish in the Arabian Sea," he
said. There were a host of other problems too. Contractor’s effort not
withstanding, it is very rare for Indian real estate developers to see
long-term value in a beautiful public space. Indian businesses are so
accustomed to making easy money in affluent islands that they are not
trained to see the more difficult but vast wealth in common public good.

A generation ago, Indians had fewer things to convert into islands.
Schools in the 1980s and 1990s, for instance, had a spectrum of Indians.
Some of us studied in schools that had the children of “smugglers" (as
successful business people were called in Chennai then) and slum kids.
And the whole nation, or states, watched the same films. Now schools and
cinema have become islands.

One of the lessons Chennai taught me is that the best way to practise
caste is by making it art. The most enduring Brahmin islands of Chennai
are not their residential lanes but their music and dance. So it is not
surprising to me that the most respectable islands today, which are not
overtly recognized as social islands, are the arts —“good" cinema,
“multiplex cinema", meaningful theatre, classical music and jazz. We
also hide in “institutions", which is a Nehruvian euphemism for the
regulation of the popular low-brow by the authoritarian good stock
through the medium of “ethics".

It is not that the islanders do not enjoy mingling with the other
Indians. They do at times. For instance, many of us do enjoy
air-conditioned public transport, like the fabulous Delhi Metro. But
only as long as we can return to our islands.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
