# Nirav Modi and the myth of the path to success

*2018-02-24*

A few months ago, GQ magazine tried to understand the extraordinary
success of the jeweller Nirav Modi. Was he “a marketing genius", or “a
master diamantaire" who knew how to extract work from talented
craftsmen, or a capitalist romantic who wanted to rebel against
tradition and “make a billion-dollar point"? The article did not ponder
other options. It praised his “imperious, ballsy core" and his
“razor-sharp PR strategy". In 2016, a short profile on CNBC.com
attributed his success to “a passion for diamonds and an understanding
of luxury". The profile conveyed that he was self-made, a coveted label
that implies innate brilliance. He was quoted in the profile as saying
that he “never borrowed from family".

Now we know where he borrowed from—several banks, reportedly collecting
thousands of crores in alleged collusion with executives from a public
sector bank who broke the rules to help him. He was a player in a
corrupt system, and now faces serious charges.

Until a few weeks ago, a vast number of small and aspiring entrepreneurs
saw in his life and words, as they normally do see in the lives of
billionaires, a path to material success. But in the telling of his
story, in the analysis of his success, what he omitted was a fact he
must have known—that he was committing a fraud, or a technical fraud. It
was an important omission. Even if we consider the possibility that he
is “a marketing genius" and that he had a deep “understanding of
luxury", the fact is that his extraordinary and swift success over the
past decade was built on some shady dealings. The real message was that
you have to game the system to be a very rich person in India. If you do
not know how, or if you do not have “the ballsy core" for it, you are
nurturing a wrong aspiration. We do not know if this message is true. We
only know that in the case of several disgraced rich people, it has been
true.

This is the sort of detail that is usually omitted from inspirational
stories—an unflattering or a nefarious truth that is usually so crucial
to the success of the inspirational figure that every other factor is
trivial. What if the truth is that every analysis of success in the
world contains such crucial omissions? What if corruption, or even luck,
is not merely a contributor to success but more fundamental than that?
What if success is often a consequence of unspoken or inglorious or even
unknown and mysterious causes? What if the publicly shared reasons for
material success are, in reality, inconsequential? This means the notion
of The Path is an illusion, and the entire aspiration market has been
fed only the placebo of inspiration. The podcasts, books and interviews
that explain the success of the successful might be precious as
journalism, as knowledge, but even as broad guides to how to achieve
your own success, they may never help you in the objective. This may
explain the simple fact that most businesses fail, most people do not
succeed by the measure of their own ambitions. The notion that a path to
success exists makes those who fail believe that they chose the wrong
paths.

It is impossible to prove that all success stories in general omit the
real causes of success because the concealment is revealed to us only in
some cases, for instance when the carefully spun public story begins to
crumble. But there are broad indicators all around us.

The start-up fever, for instance, that is spreading to the youth in the
lower-middle classes has its origins in the fables that have emerged
from the higher classes. In talks and journalistic interviews, a type of
young entrepreneur has created the myth that they found investors
because they are bright, risk-taking innovators. What is never announced
is that the start-up culture in India favours upper-class youth, who do
not, in reality, take substantial risks because they will not exactly
starve if they fail. Also, they are in the same social club as the
venture capitalists, which makes things easier. This lottery of class is
never talked about when people explain the success of a few
entrepreneurs to millions who wish to make something of their own lives.

The lottery of class as a prerequisite for success is a common feature
in many fields. Fashion, for example. A few years ago, when I attended a
fashion week, I saw many “economically disadvantaged" students from
Mumbai’s chawls flocking the venue. They told me that they aspired to be
fashion designers. They were fascinated by the talks and designer
presentations. Nobody told them that the primary requirement to succeed
in Indian fashion as a designer is to be born into a particular social
class. Talent itself, in some arts, is not separate from family
background.

Sometimes the central cause of a success story is not concealed
deliberately but buried in the slush pile of feeble analysis. For
instance, the stupendous success of Chetan Bhagat. It is widely believed
in the publishing industry, and among writers, that he succeeded because
he had marketed himself. Since his coming, thousands of aspiring and
veteran commercial fiction writers around the country have been trying
to sell themselves, but with no success. They think Bhagat has shown the
path.

I do not believe Chetan Bhagat is a triumph of his own marketing, though
he did try. A few years ago, journalist Ankita Mukherji wrote in Open
magazine about the time when she worked as an editor for a publishing
firm. She had received a manuscript by Bhagat, then an unknown banker.
On the first page was a CD, with a clear marketing plan. He would, among
other things, buy back copies of his own book and make it a best-seller
in the initial weeks, which would then, he reasoned, make other people
apart from him buy the book. But she rejected the draft of Five-Point
Someone, which went on to become a sensation for a new generation of
readers.

Bhagat did not become a best-seller because of his marketing plan. His
story was appealing and his language was a relief to millions of
Indians. Still, the chief reason he succeeded lay somewhere else—he was
from the Indian Institute of Technology. We forget what a novelty it was
14 years ago—to have an IITian write a popular lowbrow story in
high-school English (I believe that if he were from BITS Pilani, he
would have failed). His initial readership was not only the IITians, as
was commonly believed, but the hundreds of thousands who failed to get
into the institutes. The reason for his success was, I believe, lost
first in journalistic and literary contempt towards his novel, then in
the facile glorification of the lowbrow. His success is hard to
replicate because it is the consequence of a unique confluence of a man,
a story, an overvalued brand and an age.

The idea that a path to success exists, though a myth, is not entirely
useless. It makes people draw up plans, and do marvellous things; it
collects a generation and gives them a direction. Then most fail, and
some succeed for reasons we will never know.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
