# Is &#8216;farmer suicide&#8217; fake news, but of the good folks?

*2018-12-24*

One measure of human misery in India is a state secret. The government
has not released a figure—how many farmers or farm workers in India
killed themselves every year since 2015. This suicide demographic is
important to activists who have successfully developed a phenomenon
called “farmer suicides” to promote the fiction or half-truth that
India’s farmers and landless farm labourers kill themselves because of
debt and poverty.

It is odd, at first glance, that the government should be secretive
about the latest statistics of “farmer suicides”. The data, last
published by the National Crime Records Bureau in 2015, actually shows
that India’s farmers and other agricultural workers are less likely to
kill themselves compared to other sections of society. Also, the poorest
agricultural workers in India are less likely to kill themselves
compared to more fortunate farmers, challenging the correlation between
poverty and suicide. In fact, India’s rural poor are less likely to
commit suicide than far more affluent citizens of most advanced
economies. However, the perception is so deeply rooted and wide that
India’s farmers commit suicide because of debt and poverty, that the
government is probably scared of revealing any figures that can help its
political opponents.

Historically, people have projected their favourite ideas on suicides.
Poets thought it was a philosophical act. Nationalists thought it was a
patriotic act. The romantics thought it was the ultimate act of passion.

Mainstream scientific opinion today has a dry view—suicide is primarily
a mental health issue, which is influenced by a person’s neurological
make-up, genes, circumstances, diseases, even gut bacteria, and
environment.

A recent paper, ‘The Lancet Commission on global mental health and
sustainable development’, shows a correlation between poverty and mental
health. However, contrary to the picture activists paint, it appears
that the state of poverty is not a monolithic neurological profile.

In the transmission of the idea of “farmer suicides” activists have
exploited a naive aspect of journalism—to assign causes to suicide
depending on who has committed the act. In a student preparing for an
engineering entrance exam, the “cause” of suicide is “stress”; in a
Dalit student it is “oppression”, and in a farmer it is “agrarian
distress”.

“Farmer suicide” has the qualities of stupendously successful fake news.
It is not an outright lie, but not a fact either, and those who want to
believe it, do so because it corroborates something else. But then, so
what if it is fake news? This is an exceedingly important question which
guides several people who can see through the falsity of the propaganda,
but believe propaganda from good folks is not a bad thing. The reasoning
is that, after all, the exaggeration and the excessive extrapolation of
a phenomenon is to help the poor in a cruel nation. How else can the
good fight evil if they are not a bit cunning?

This is a flawed reasoning. The hypothesis of ‘farmer suicide’ is, in
fact, dangerous.

If people are willing to believe that poverty is a trigger of suicide
they should accept a far more powerful trigger, whose evidence, too, is
far more substantial than the poverty angle. The trigger is in the news
of suicide itself, in the very transmission of the idea that a type of
person in a specific circumstance is very likely to commit suicide.

This is why a recommendation for journalists prepared in 2015 by a
global network of organizations, including the largest scientific
organisation in the world, the National Institute of Mental Health,
states that the news media should “avoid reporting that death by suicide
was preceded by a single event, such as a recent job loss, divorce or
bad grades. Reporting like this leaves the public with an overly
simplistic and misleading understanding of suicide”. The note also
discourages “describing recent suicides as an ‘epidemic,’
‘skyrocketing’, or in other strong terms”. In short, how activists
transmit the news of “farmer suicides” and how most of Indian media
report the phenomenon is exactly what some of the most respected
institutes in the world that study suicide suggest we should not do.

The news media comes up with several new “causes” for suicide. We have
read about an online game called “Blue Whale Challenge” that sent
adolescents to obedient deaths. Tibetan monks immolated themselves,
peacefully, to protest against China. Such “causes” did not last long.
If they were indeed “causes” they should have endured, but they faded
away soon after the news cycle ended. These “causes” were fanned by the
media. Many other “causes” have become extinct as the world has moved
on. “Farmer suicide” has endured because it is politically useful to
ideologues and journalism has not had the conviction to reject the
“causes” that the activists have promoted.

Also, the propaganda of “farmer suicide” benefits activists more than
farmers. The idea of debt-driven suicide was popularised by the activist
Vandana Shiva in her attempt to create public opinion against
genetically modified crops. Now, the idea is used by various activists
who wish to flog their own agendas.

Also, a nation that is trained to react to suicides as a social,
economic and political phenomenon, may become a society that will not be
moved by the living anymore. “How can you be so miserable,” the rich may
ask the poor one day, “If people like you are not killing yourself?”

Manu Joseph is a journalist and author, most recently of ‘Miss Laila,
Armed and Dangerous’.
