# Watching ‘Avengers: Infinity War’ with a nine-year-old

*2018-05-12*

Darling, everything is as usual. An unhappy attendant gives us our 3D
goggles, which means we will soon witness yet another immensely
enjoyable lame fiction on IMAX where good will defeat evil after some
tense twists. Surely your circle of nine-year-olds was exaggerating a
bit when they said “it will be impossible not to cry in the end". How
grim can Marvel Studios be?

Five minutes into Avengers: Infinity War, maybe you cannot see it yet
but I have to accept that something is not quite normal. It is not just
that the arch-villain Thanos is already extremely powerful because
villains usually are at the start of a story. What is odd is the absence
of dignity in the heroes. In the first 5 minutes, Thor screams as Thanos
tortures him, that too with one hand. He looks baffled and helpless.
Loki, who is related to Thor in some form that I don’t understand, is
squished and killed by Thanos. Hulk is thrashed and would have been
killed had not a dying hero beamed him away. Other minor superheroes
die.

I can feel all the joy in you vanish. I want to say “this is only a
film" but I know that would be a foolish thing to say. Also, you will
then say about that part of life which is not a movie, “This is only
real." There is no argument against that.

The thing is, I can see that the writers love Thanos more than they love
the heroes. Writers do usually love the darker guys. Thanos is serious,
majestic, deeply unhappy and he has a glorious purpose. He believes that
the problem with life in all the worlds in the universe is that there is
too much of it and very little of what they need to survive. So he seeks
the six Infinity Stones that will give him the power to destroy half of
all life in the universe. It will not be a genocide because genocide
discriminates. What Thanos wishes for is just random halving of
populations. Thanos may not have heard of a man called Thomas Malthus
who once said the number of people grows when things are good, which
soon results in so many people that things are not so good any more, but
Thanos is driven by the same view. Actually, most people who wish “to
control the population" too are talking about the same thing even though
they may not wish to massacre the living, rather they would like to deny
life to the unborn. Strictly speaking, Thanos is slightly fairer than a
former chief economist of the World Bank called Lawrence H. Summers who
once signed a memo in 1991 that said toxic waste from factories should
be moved from the US to poorer countries because the value of life is
cheaper in poor countries. When the letter got leaked, Summers said he
was only joking. Maybe it was just a joke but I know you don’t trust
people who are hurtful first and then say they were only joking. Also,
you are right, “a joke has be funny".

I like the fact that Thanos loves his daughter, Gamora, the green alien,
who was blue in Avatar, and that Thanos insults her boyfriend, by just
enunciating the word “boyfriend", or maybe you didn’t find it as funny
as I did. Somehow I like the fact that Peter Quill says his relationship
with Gamora is too deep for him to be called a “boyfriend". But then
soon everything begins to turn grim. You finally press my shoulder to
ask, “Is this a sad movie?"

Of course not, I say. Avengers is too expensive to be sad. That is the
price every successful story pays—it is doomed to be naïve and happy in
the end. A superhero movie is a lot like Indians doing
something—everything will go wrong but “in the end" it will all work
out. Yes, there is a lot of death and violence. That is how a story
tries to be unpredictable these days—through deaths. Otherwise, it is
hard to beat the viewer. We know too many stories, we know what is going
to happen most of the time. Every story, after all, is the sum total of
all stories ever told. Storytellers have to find ways to surprise us.

But, towards the end, when I suspect that some heroes will die, I want
to whisper to you some advice—“Never be a minor superhero franchise in
life." But then, as Thanos wins all the Infinity Stones and with a click
of his fingers dooms half of all life in the universe to turn into ash,
and half of the avengers and their allies collapse into dust, among them
are the big ones too. Dr Strange dies, Black Panther goes. But what
breaks your heart is when 15-year-old Spider-Man clings to Iron Man and
cries, “I don’t feel so good Mr Stark" and “I don’t want to go, please,
I don’t want to go Mr Stark. I am sorry, Tony, I am sorry".

Now we wait for the resurrection and justice. We have seen too many
movies not to wait for the turn that will bring back all that is lost.
But then the film ends. Half the universe is dead, and evil has won.
That is it.

There is stunned silence in the theatre. The few who rise to leave
receive cold stares of hatred from those who sit in mourning—we need to
show more respect to the departed. There is funereal stillness in the
hall. Adolescents weep. A teenaged girl, who is sobbing, is held by both
her parents. Are you amused at the fall of the teenagers? After all,
your arch-villain is The Teenager. Just a few hours ago, a teenager had
scolded you in school, “Shut up and eat your f-wording food."

“What a bad movie," you say. “What a bad movie." Outside the hall I see
a teenager weep and I chuckle. You glare at me. “That is rude." You
fight back your own tears but they now flow.

There is no way this story can end like this. These days the end is
never the end. There is always a sequel, you know that. Marvel has
already announced the sequel. Only they and Dr Strange know how it is
going to end. But I think we can guess—all the superheroes, at least the
big ones, will rise from the dead. Have faith in capitalism. There is
sorrow only in art.

Yet, I accept, the statements from the boss of Marvel Studios, Kevin
Feige, are very disturbing. He has hinted that some of the deaths of the
big superheroes might be permanent. The directors, Anthony and Joe
Russo, too have said disturbing things: “The audience can tell you they
love chocolate ice cream, but if you give it to them every day, they’re
going to get sick of it real fast. You’ve got to stay ahead of them….

“You have to go to very difficult places for the stakes to feel real,
for the characters to feel like they have something to lose, for the
audience to feel like they have something at risk."

But if you wish to believe me more than them, which is unlikely, I think
almost all the superheroes, especially Dr Strange, Black Panther and
SpiderMan, are coming back. Apart from the trap of popularity and
commercial success, a story is doomed by another factor—the good have to
win in the end, that is the con in every successful story, there is no
escaping that. That is the demand from everyone, including you, and that
is what the storytellers will supply.

What is going to happen in the next Avengers is that there will be some
time-travel trick or alternate reality.

“If you travel at the speed of light, it will change time," you say.
“But that is so obviously not true. Nothing can change time."

The dead Avengers will return and whatever path they take, it is going
to be lame, and a form of cheating. The sequel is already doomed. That
is the price the storytellers have paid for telling a great, bold story.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
