# The ‘intellectual-yet-idiot’ and other ideas

*2018-03-24*

An evil becomes moral when it gives everyone an equal opportunity to be
a part of it. That is why all cunning caste systems have become ladders.
People hate castes, but they love climbing. In the new hierarchies of
our times, anybody can become a Brahmin, at least in theory. In the face
of such freedom, a whole generation is then preoccupied with climbing
the ladder. It does not occur to anybody to ask why they must climb, why
something is deemed a superior state of mind.

This is the case in the vast caste system of global liberal academia,
too, where there are whole hierarchies of clubs, intellectuals, courses
and prizes. But now one man has begun to insult the very idea of
intellectuality.

If he were an outsider, the establishment would have defamed him as a
bitter simpleton and an endearing semi-literate. But then Nassim
Nicholas Taleb is a Brahmin among Brahmins. Here is how:

The intellectual establishment has a predilection for the upper class;
Taleb, a Lebanese Orthodox Christian, is from that nation’s political
and social aristocracy. The establishment has great regard for fancy
universities; Taleb is from Wharton, and the University of Paris. The
establishment has an unspoken view that mathematics is highbrow; Taleb
is a professional and academic mathematician. The establishment finds
scientists who can quote poetry very cute and important; Taleb is a
scholar of probability, a former quant-trader who used complex
mathematical financial tools, and he is said to speak several languages,
including dead ones, and often quotes from serious English, French and
Graeco-Roman literature. The intellectual establishment has promoted the
idea that people who read a lot, especially obscure books, are deep;
Taleb claims the establishment itself has not read what he has read.

Taleb is an anomaly that a system creates, an asset that has gone rogue.
He is a perfect intellectual who has risen to say that the modern
intellectual is vastly inferior to your grandmother. “…people are
perfectly entitled to rely on their own ancestral instincts and to
listen to their grandmothers who have a better track record than these
policymaking goons." He holds that the transformation of local cultures
in the name of modernity, democracy, environment and other virtues is a
crime that the “intellectual-yet-idiot" is perpetrating. These are the
undercurrents in his latest book, Skin In The Game, which is a brief
history of risk, and argues, among other things, that problems occur in
a society when influential people do not have to face the consequences
of their bad ideas.

Taleb first rose to prominence with his book The Black Swan, which
claimed that improbable events have enormous impacts that dwarf
everything else, and that certainty is a misunderstanding of incomplete
data. The intellectual establishment, which includes the influential
news media, rewarded him by declaring him one of the most important
thinkers in the world. But over the years it has become evident that he
wishes to take down the entire intellectual world, or at least that part
which he does not agree with or which has slighted him in some way. He
has said repeatedly that professionals like economists, historians and
psychologists are frauds. And columnists too. Taleb finds the word
“scientist" in “social scientist" hilarious.

He has frequently tweeted that Steven Pinker, the “cognitive
psychologist" from Harvard who argued in his book, The Better Angels Of
Our Nature, that we are living through the most peaceful period in human
history, is an ignoramus, or a fraud, because he has based his arguments
on a faulty understand of data and math. “Pinker has about every
attribute of the charlatan. Nothing short of a charlatan," he once
tweeted. After the popular American astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson
tweeted that if people are willing to accept that science can predict
the solar eclipse, they should also accept the scientific predictions of
climate change, Taleb tweeted, “This guy is an intellectual fraud,"
because it was deceitful to equate the science of predicting the path of
a heavenly body with predicting more chaotic phenomena like climate. He
has had spats with several popular intellectuals. Also, he has often
called The New York Times’ columnists and journalists “imbeciles". He
once insulted The New Yorker magazine: “The opposite of reading is not
not reading, but reading something like the @NewYorker."

For mysterious reasons, the victims of his assaults have not been able
to respond to him in powerful ways, or have simply chosen the elegance
of silence over what would certainly be an eventful battle. Pinker did
defend himself but he was so respectful of Taleb, it seemed like a
tribute. Only Sam Harris, a neuroscientist and a popular author and
podcaster, whom Taleb once called an “imposter", has demonstrated the
ability to match Taleb’s venom: “This guy is just insufferable. I’ve
actually never witnessed a marriage of incompetence and confidence so
fully and grotesquely consummated in the mind of a person with a public
platform."

Taleb’s arguments are not always ironclad. For example, his contempt for
the science of genetically modified organisms is based chiefly on the
argument that we do not know the risk they carry. By that reasoning
there should be no mobile phone towers as we do not know the health
risks they pose.

The sanctum sanctorum of American media has not reviewed Skin In The
Game, yet. The New York Times has completely ignored him, but the book
has made it to its Best Sellers list, which carried an incorrect
description. Taleb then called them, once again, “imbeciles", following
which the venerated newspaper made a correction. Taleb claims in his
book, “Those who use foul language on social networks are sending an
expensive signal that they are free—and, ironically, competent."

His intellectual-yet-idiot appears frequently in the book in various
forms, “telling the rest of us 1) what to do, 2) what to eat, 3) how to
speak, 4) how to think, and 5) whom to vote for". He is also the type of
person who “studies grammar before speaking a language…"

Within the ambit of action and consequences, Skin In The Game discusses
numerous ideas:

That “we are much better at doing than understanding".

That if we do not take risks for our opinions, we “are nothing".

That a small number of people in a society can be exceedingly
influential—for instance, it doesn’t take a majority to ban a film. And
that the state of not being offended is less influential than the state
of being offended.

That ethics will always outlive law.

That neighbours get along better than roommates.

That people with no intelligence at all will work well, “under the right
market structure".

That if you have a choice between a surgeon who looks like a good
surgeon (Hollywood version), and a surgeon who looks like a butcher, you
must choose the guy who looks like the butcher.

And that “courage is the only virtue you cannot fake". Taleb, evidently,
has not met some Indian empathy uncles.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

*He tweets at @manujosephsan*
