# ‘Jugaad’, India’s most overrated idea

*2018-08-18*

How can you not like him? He used to sell an insurance policy to
Mumbai’s train commuters who wished to travel ticketless. For a small
premium, he insured them from the consequences of being caught by ticket
checkers. He is among the delinquent Indians I have only heard of and
never met, but I do wish he exists.

This fable is in the class of endearing stories about vernacular, and
usually rustic, Indians with almost no resources doing smart things,
often by breaking the law. There is an unspoken surprise in the
perception of such fables by journalists and academics—that poor Indians
can be so smart. Collectively, this smartness is known as jugaad in
north India. It includes the insufferable stories of the dabbawalas of
Mumbai, who collect and deliver lunch boxes with precision, and an
enterprising Sikh man who uses a washing machine to make lassi.

In the past decade, a halo has been bestowed on jugaad by the confluent
attention of Indian English-media journalists who usually convert their
incomprehension of provincial stories into hefty sociological concepts;
foreign correspondents who then “understand" India through such concepts
and promote them; academics who then quote the respectable global media
to extrapolate more than their understanding allows; and the respectable
media who then quote academics to corroborate the sociological concepts
that they helped create in the first place. That is how jugaad became
“the Indian way of innovation" that management gurus advised the West to
emulate. A form of law-breaking and street smartness in the face of
poverty and governmental incompetence was elevated into a management
principle.

A book that was published when jugaad was at the height of global
respect, in 2012, is a good example of how the over-intellectualization
of a simple Indian way of life created a bogus philosophy. Jugaad
Innovation: Think Frugal, Be Flexible, Generate Breakthrough Growth is
actually a meta-jugaad.

Written by Navi Radjou and Simone Ahuja, who are consultants, and
Jaideep Prabhu, who is an academic, the work is a jugaad book about
jugaad which tries to create something out of nothing. The book begins
with a blunder. It quotes Albert Einstein as saying, “Any intelligent
fool can make things bigger, more complex, and more violent. It takes a
touch of genius—and a lot of courage to move in the opposite direction."
In reality, it is a quote by the economist E.F. Schumacher. This moment
of mediocrity is a portent of what is to follow. After the quote, the
book immediately begins to express awe at how one remarkable Indian has
found a way to use clay pots to keep water cool, a compliment that may
amuse Indians who actually live here. The book then profiles the man
whose true achievement is that he has marketed the ancient clay pot as a
terracotta “fridge" that didn’t need electricity. The authors call this
jugaad, and go on to extol global corporations to think small, like
rural Indians. They then start calling Benjamin Franklin’s experiments
jugaad, and it is then clear that they are confused about their very
premise.

Like many urbane fans of jugaad, the authors wished to abolish from the
idea of jugaad all that is illegal and unethical because such gurus
cannot be seen as endorsing something that breaks laws and morals. But
then jugaad is not merely the smartness of an individual, or even that
thing which absolute conformists in suits keep parroting—“thinking out
of the box". Because how can India, or any other civilization, have a
monopoly over these? Jugaad is “frugal innovation", the authors say, and
their central premise is that giant corporations should learn from poor
Indians. But then why should we ask giant corporations with giant
profits to be frugal about their most useful role in society—innovation?
Also, a poor Indian has good reasons to be frugal; why should a giant
corporation be so?

Jugaad is often exactly that mangled thing which has lent the idea its
name—the illegal, dumb, dangerous vehicle, a poor man’s Transformer,
built from the parts of other vehicles, and irrigation pumps. If, over
150 years after the invention of the internal combustion engine, modern
Indians are using this as a form of public transport, then there is
nothing to rejoice in the fact, or for more advanced societies to learn
from. Jugaad, the vehicle, is a consequence of many problems, chiefly
India’s failure to provide safe and affordable public travel to millions
of villagers. And jugaad, as a method of innovation, is evidence of
similar problems. The awe of some Western academics for this inferior
form of innovation is similar to the awe of very happy Scandinavians who
overrate Bhutan’s Third World contentment.

Also, the whole point of jugaad is that it is no big deal. Any culture
can assemble scrap and make a bad car. Any culture can put a door on a
clay pot and call it a fridge. The existence of jugaad is merely the
evidence that the circumstances of a society are so bad that its smart
people are doing what smart people in other civilizations do not have to
do.

There is an argument that such humble innovations can solve problems no
one else but the poor want to solve. But then India holds enduring proof
that giant capitalistic market forces that throw up accidental solutions
are more beneficial to the poor than jugaad, or humble altruistic
research. For instance, Media Lab Asia, the pious short-lived
collaboration between MIT Media Lab and the Indian government, worked on
a range of technology to improve the lives of the poor. For nearly 10
years, I followed the work of researchers on the cheap computer, cheap
phone and also on proto-Artificial Intelligence that will translate
languages.

In the end, the problems were solved by BlackBerry, Apple and Google,
giant corporations that thought big and believed in having extravagant
budgets for innovation.

That is why the real jugaad is not Jugaad; it is Tesla.  
  
Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets @manujosephsan
