# Tequila ‘chaas’ and patriotic ‘chaat’

*2018-09-07*

In any city outside the subcontinent, when I pass by an Indian
restaurant and see Indians inside, I feel we will not get along, even if
they are not social activists. To me they look like villagers who hold
on to home and tradition, from which all dangerous ideas come. So, when
it is my own time to run to the lap of Indian food, I walk into the
restaurant sheepishly, maybe with mild shame for being enticed by mere
food, and with unnecessary discretion, as though I am about to do
something illicit. This is unreasonable because I know it is instinctive
for most Indians, after a period of time in Western civilization—the
length of time decided by an individual’s capacity for being a cultural
orphan—to rush to a place called Taj Mahal or some such thing to relish
even fake Indian food over authentic foreign cuisine.

I didn’t need any cultural justification a few weeks ago, though, when I
walked into Indian Accent in London, a highly regarded fine-dining
restaurant. It was work. The Lounge editor had asked me to eat there and
meet chef Manish Mehrotra, who was visiting the city for two weeks to
change the menu.

Like most chefs, he is an amiable man who is mildly amused when you
appear to have dietary restrictions, suspiciously with a fitness motive.
After telling him that I don’t eat red meat, and I thought his eyes said
“imbecile", I couldn’t find the courage to tell him that for the
frivolous reason of living beyond 100, I (usually) choose to avoid any
grains, or the type of sugar that is called sugar, or milk. In any case,
a good look at the chef lured me to be decadent for an afternoon.

The first thing I ordered was a cocktail that I would have thought not
possible—tequila in a common Tamil drink, which the restaurant correctly
calls neer more and is generally wrongly termed buttermilk (it is
diluted yogurt). Even in the interpretation of the drink, the restaurant
does not use buttermilk on the menu and that, on a scale of
authenticity, is of an order higher than the common Indian English
novel. Neer More—Mustard Tequila, Fresh Yogurt, Kummel is what the menu
says, and that is what it is.

A long trail of tasters follows, like chaat and green pea bhel, and
Kolhapuri chicken and soy keema. All familiar, yet different. Like
Hollywood’s humanoid aliens.

Indian Accent’s salad version of Kolhapuri Chicken. Courtesy: Indian
Accent

When, at the end of it all, Mehrotra finally arrives to have a chat, he
says he doesn’t try to achieve “authenticity" because after a point
authenticity seems ridiculous. There is such a thing as “original",
though, and “fake". Most curries in London restaurants, he says, are
fake Indian food. There is such a thing as authentic mayonnaise, he
says, but not authentic Indian food. “The ancient French have put things
on record, on how to make mayonnaise. You can say this is sacred to many
people. There is no Indian food that has a sacred recipe. We don’t do
stuff like that. But there is a certain soul to Indian food." The soul,
he says, is in the assembly of ingredients, from where they come, the
process and the reasons, though forgotten, why things are the way they
are.

Mehrotra lays out what his ultimate goal is, which is also the
objective, he says, of several top Indian global chefs—to give Indian
food the global respect it deserves. “We are not just curry and naan.
And we are the land of spices, not chillies. There is a difference. And
masala chai doesn’t mean adding masala powder to chai. And Indians don’t
have mango lassi with their dinner. And what is mango lassi anyway?
Also, what is this vindaloo? Who eats vindaloo in India? And Indian food
is not something that is meant to make you bloat and go off to sleep.
Also, India is not north India. There is south India, which has the best
breakfast in the world."

He is, naturally, an endearing man to a South Indian even though at one
point when he comments on the hundreds of types of sambhar, he
recognizes sugary dal, the Gujarati-influenced abomination in Mumbai’s
fake Udupi restaurants, as sambhar.

Mehrotra says that the perception of what exactly is “Indian food" is
changing in London. “Now people know what Bangaldeshi Indian food is,
and what Indian Indian food is. Maybe not in the interiors of the UK.
Maybe not in Glasgow. But in London, there is an awareness. People know
the difference between curry houses and restaurants like us. But even
other high-end restaurants like Gymkhana still have to carry some curry.
But not in my restaurant."

It will be a mistake to read too much into tequila chaas, but the
cocktail, and everything that followed, do have something to say about
the contemporary meaning of the term “global" in an age where people
disenchanted with capitalism are claiming that globalization is nothing
but the local culture of a colonizer. But what Mehrotra points out and
shows through his food is that the modern global is not the triumph of a
single culture, it simply cannot be. Rather, the modern global is a
confederation of tweaked local cultures. Capitalism, as a good
restaurant demonstrates, has no choice but to respect diversity, while
it is sanctimonious idealism that is the true monoculture of our times.
The new global, it appears, is the profitable cosmopolitization of the
local. The Londoners see in his food something deeply familiar to them,
yet foreign. Like the “Asian literature" they are supplied by resident
South Asians.  
  
Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.  

He tweets @manujosephsan
