# Marriage in the time of politics

*2018-01-13*

Once I had a vision in which God asked a young man, “Why did you get
married", and the young man said, “To have fun". And even though God did
not intend to be rude, a great laughter escaped him. People on streets
too began to laugh. All the women in the Ladies’ Special held their
stomachs and laughed. The men dangling from train compartments laughed.
Even Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru, in their framed portraits,
began to laugh.

The most sacred tenet of modern marriage, which has been seeded by the
marriage counselling industry and advice journalism, is that “marriage
is hard work". It is a foolish analysis and probably one of the most
destructive ideas to infest the young. Marriage should be fun. It can be
fun. That is if it is not confused with eternity. An eternal marriage
does sound like hard work but that is because eternity, and not
marriage, is hard work.

Many tenets of marriage do not make any sense to the married. Many of
them look for clarity and epiphanies in novels and films and TED talks
and counselling. The one place they do not look is in politics. At first
glance there appears to be nothing that politics can teach us about
marriage, but there is a political quality to the relationship that is
not appreciated enough.

There is a set of modern marital behaviour that is directly a part of
modern political behaviour. The public posturing of the sophisticated
class contains a set of crucial qualities—the high moral ground,
self-interest masquerading as righteous indignation, the veneration of
frailties, and ceaseless lament—which have entered marriages too along
with more honourable political ideas like equality, fairness and dignity
of labour. The narcissism that inspires people to give themselves labels
extends into the marriages today where individuals describe themselves
in specific ways to be allowed contentious behaviour—“sensitive",
“depressive", and “emotionally fatigued".

But the deepest crucial political qualities of marriage are not
influenced by politics. They have parallels in politics, they are
similar to political behaviour. The marital quarrel, for instance.

The intellectual worth of debate in public life is vastly overstated. A
debate, in reality, is the T20 of intellectual activities. It is largely
a test of speed and immediacy, which leaves almost the entire human
spectrum untested. Verbal articulation, as the articulate know, is a
charlatan talent. Everybody wings it. But there is no denying that some
are good at it, and as they debate more frequently, they get better.
This happens to couples, too. The longer they are married, the more they
quarrel and their quarrels get better because they know the other’s best
lines. But what is political about the marital quarrel is the fact that
it is useless. Its outcome does not affect the outcome of the marriage.
In most cases, a marriage is neither saved nor destroyed by debate; the
winner wins nothing, the loser loses nothing. It is the nature and the
tone of the debate that is important. This has always been true of
political debates. Even though they are huge television spectacles in
many countries, their intellectual outcome hardly affect the elections.
What is important in a debate is not the rationality of the argument but
the person who emerges from the smog of words.

In many marriages men devise the strategy of avoiding quarrels. It
serves them well in other relationships—like eccentric, ageing parents.
But what works with parents never really works in an equal marriage,
which is a coalition of two pressure groups. A marriage is reassured of
its aliveness and freedom through the acrimony of a good fight when all
truths are hurled.

In love, the rewards are always over the top, but so is retribution for
hurt. A long, post-love marriage is often filled with retributions that
are out of proportion to the sins, but a couple in an upper-class
democratic system is constantly aware of this and is under pressure to
be proportionate even though proportionality is not a fundamental
natural force, it is a mere ideal and a fabrication of the justice
system.

And, in both marriage and politics, the invocation of history is not a
good sign. Because history is often a wound. Also, it is severely
contested. No side is lying, both sides are believers in a convenient
version of the wound.

People use the term “happy couples" without care as though two humans
can exhibit properties of a sofa-cum-bed, a happy sofa-cum-bed. There
are even scientific researches done on “happy couples". But can two
humans ever be a collective organism? What if happiness in a long
relationship is a zero-sum affair, what if the happiness of one is built
on the sacrifice of the other? If you are of a generation, you may think
of the lives of your mothers. This is not the political side of
marriage. Just the opposite.

Politics is not altruism, it is too ambitious for that. Amusing then
that a crafty politician like Nelson Mandela had once stated that you
can achieve much in politics if you do not wish to take credit. We
instantly see the wisdom in his statement but we also know what he was
talking about cannot be politics. There are bureaucrats and cops who
achieve great things because they choose to be anonymous. But politics
is about being in plain sight, it is about taking credit. That is, in
fact, the political side of couplehood, too. To be seen by the other,
that is what being married is. To be seen and acknowledged and praised,
and in the early days even adored. Singlehood is a form of anonymity. To
be married is to have a witness to your days, and to, inevitably, preen.

Couplehood is not only a private arrangement but also a public act.
Every couple tries to be good ambassadors of marriage. Marriage is often
a public event, a social campaign (some days I feel that there are only
two reasons why there is so much happiness on Facebook—couples marketing
marriage, and people trying to make their former lovers sad).

When people propose in public, or throw surprise parties for their
spouses, they are not only committing an act of love, they are also
campaigning, performing, promoting themselves and stepping into the
spotlight. A public display of affection is often a political moment.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
