# One theory about loneliness

*2018-10-20*

Do the lonely deserve compassion? It is hard to argue with this. But
then most people are lonely because they too have spurned, they have
rejected those who wished to be with them. Loneliness is not always a
state of being rejected, it is also a consequence of a person deeming
isolation superior to the slim pickings of life. Somewhere in this world
there is a lonely person who is so because you are not worth her time.
Even the old are lonely not because they have no company but because the
company that is available to them, outside their family, is poor; the
world has matched them by their caste, age, and they are stranded with
acquaintances with whom they would never have dined in another time.
Loneliness is not a scarcity of humans, but a rebuke—of the lonely.

A high bar for a mate is not the only cause for loneliness. There is the
loneliness of small-town people in the metros, who wish to reject their
useless provincial acquaintances and hit it off with the posh but they
are rejected for being “downmarket" or vernacular. People who are able
to enjoy the company of their own original class even as they move up in
life are lucky, or at least lucky in the companionship department. There
is also the loneliness that comes from isolation by your own tribe for
your views and actions. This is why most people appear to have agreeable
views. The phenomenon also explains why fierce intellectual independence
requires loneliness. Loneliness is the f\*\*\*you money of art. If you
have no more friends to lose you can say anything you want.

Such a state of existence is different from the loneliness of a job, as
in the case of scientific researchers, mathematicians and artists.
Sustained intellectual work is possible only for those who have the
ability or are trained in spending many hours a day in isolation, but
such people can still be highly convivial, filing their lives with
people and enjoying them without erecting a high bar for friendships. In
fact, contrary to their reputation, most scientists and artists have a
vast network of friends in their own fields because they need their
village to get ahead. But intellectual independence is another matter.
Can one be the flâneur and the heretic at the same time?

You may think loneliness is a common feature, if not the very story, in
films and novels. Actually it is not a feature. Loneliness is a plot
device. When I was a boy growing up in Chennai, where family is the unit
of life, and I started watching Hollywood films, I noticed that Rambo
did not have a family. And Arnold Schwarzenegger was mostly alone in
many of his movies. I was certain that most white people did not have
families. It occurred to me that even Jesus Christ, who I had thought
was a white man, was mostly lonely. In many novels, too, you will find
the protagonist living alone. This is a result of decluttering, which
writers invented long before Marie Kondo influenced even Cancerian women
to throw away stuff. One of the most difficult things to achieve while
writing fiction are the unremarkable interactions between characters. It
is tough but not central to what novelists wish to say. For this reason
it annoys most storytellers. So they make the protagonist lonely. That
reduces the problem of character interactions. The same trick of
decluttering is possibly the reason why in the film Gravity, the
character played by Sandra Bullock reveals that she had lost her little
daughter in an accident. That way she is not yet another childless
female lead, and the director does not have to worry about that
inevitable but tired arc where Bullock has to talk emotional stuff from
space to her girl on earth.

Storytellers have also romanticized loneliness as a sign of intelligence
or strength. As a consumer of this myth in my adolescence and early 20s,
I never saw my loneliness as a problem that I needed to resolve. All
around me people rated companionship above many things like loyalty,
decency and even fairness. But I was proud to be alone.

As a result, from age 20-30 I was known by about 25 people, in my
calculation. In that time I understood that sorrow is often a
misunderstanding of boredom. I used to get confused by people who had
many friends, who were always out drinking, who told me they were
lonely. How could beautiful women in the company of so many layers of
friendship be lonely? Only later would I understand what everybody
already knew—that we need to belong to someone, and own (the same
person, preferably). Or we will have to prepare for loneliness. But then
couples, too, feel lonely. They feel lonely together, as couples. Here
too they are not spurned, rather they have spurned the couples who wish
to be with them.

So do the lonely deserve sympathy?

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
