# What lovers must steal from the free speech movement

*2018-07-14*

On how they must be, lovers tend to derive from other lovers. That is
why they are often miserable. There has to be a better idea for the
blind than to follow the blind. They do derive a lot from literature
too, which they would not if they actually met the writers who have said
the most beautiful things about love. In fact, lovers should learn to be
better lovers in places where no one tells them they should look—some of
our grandest political and economic ideas.

Democracy teaches us that the best idea, which is yours, may not be as
influential as the second best idea because the second best idea is
everyone’s second best idea. Despotism teaches us that it works as long
as you are making money. Marxism has always tried to tell us that a
conflict is not an anomaly but often what we call life; and that the
resolution of a conflict is not more important than the conflict itself.

But what offers the most useful practical lessons—not just for romantic
lovers but also parents and children and siblings—is freedom of speech.
As we know, it is a principle, upheld by more Beautiful People in Delhi
than is believable, that we should not harm anyone for speaking his
mind. Some comedians confuse free speech with offence. They go on to
defame the idea of being offended. If we believe in or love anything at
all, it is inevitable that we will be offended. We need to have faith in
free speech not only when we need it but also for the times when we are
offended. Free speech is not merely a right but also a duty. And that is
what lovers should accept. There will be times when they are offended by
the most important people in their lives. Full stop. So how should they
respond?

Many years ago, after Aishwarya Rai announced the end of her
relationship with Salman Khan in the form of a press release that she
faxed to many publications, accusing him of “verbal, physical and
emotional" abuse, I spoke to several people who were close to both the
stars to write a magazine story about their tumultuous love. One person
told me that Rai used to punish Khan through silences; he was
unaccustomed to that form of punishment, and it drove him crazy. At the
time, I was about 27, and I did not understand why mere silence should
drive someone crazy—in fact, if your girlfriend wishes to be nasty and
offers silence, that should be a relief. Some readers too wondered why
any person must overreact to silence; but many readers understood the
silent treatment as a potent punishment. All lovers punish but the
reasons and methods vary, as does the impact on the targets of the
punishment too. Some lovers give a long rope before they choose to
inflict punitive measures; some have a low threshold and they punish
even if there are no great transgressions of the kind Rai claimed to
have endured. Lovers punish their lovers for statements, behaviour,
mannerism, inaction, and the fear of such punishment may greatly
influence the nature of the relationship.

When the price for speaking up is high, people shut up. This is what
happens at the political, social and religious and corporate levels in
all societies, and this is exactly what happens between lovers
too—everything in love is out of proportion but when the punishment is
disproportionate to the offence, it does exactly what an authoritarian
state does to its citizens, artists and salaried journalists—people
begin to curb their own expression. And when people in love do not have
the freedom to say what they want to say or do what they wish to, they
will fall out of love just to find that freedom. Love, like a mature
democracy, must work towards lowering the price one has to pay for
offending.

But it appears that many lovers are a lot like India—they grant free
speech in theory because they wish to be principled, but not in
practice. Actually, many lovers behave a lot like China.

Like all important ideas, the advantages of free speech too can be
explained without morality. In fact, the doom of romantic
authoritarianism can be explained by two popular ideas that are dear to
economics and business—the law of diminishing returns, and the
competency trap. Extracting a high cost from a lover for an offence,
while profitable in the beginning, will increasingly yield less as its
potency wears off through repetition. Also, people who are highly
successful in getting the relationship they want by meting out tactical
punishments do not find the need to develop peacetime strategies that
might be more essential as the circumstances of the couple change with
age.

But all this does not mean that people can go around stating whatever
they wish to their lovers and expect tolerance. There have been times
when I have seen men use the ruse of humour to insult their wives. But
then isn’t the freedom to express malice an important part of free
speech? Isn’t most of nasty humour and art actually a form of
aggression? There could be an argument that cartoonists should be
allowed to insult and hurt whomever they wish to, but I don’t think this
form of free speech makes any sense to love because the objective of
love is not freedom. Happiness maybe, but not freedom. Political free
speech has to be complete and universal—worthy of both Galieleo and
homeopathy. The free speech of lovers cannot be absolute.

In any case, there is no point in telling people in relationships, as
they glow in the full powers they have over others, how to be better
people. People often do not lose love after a valiant battle. In the
end, people throw love away for no good reason.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
