# The compassion of the ‘Dangal’ diet

*2018-01-26*

They eat bread but we get along. They were coming home for dinner so I
had to sneak into a dealer’s place and score a whole loaf. The things we
have to do for friends. I was wearing a hooded jacket but the boys in
the pastry shop recognized me. I thought they were trying to suppress a
laugh, and all the addicts in the bakery too. They were thinking,
“Eventually everybody falls". I wanted to scream, “It’s not for me."
Outside, it was broad daylight and there were children about, including
little girls, who have a moral compass, and I tried to hide the loaf
with my elbow. A passing old woman surely tried not to meet my eyes; she
was probably widowed by maida (refined flour). I hoped I will not
encounter anyone who knows me, and I remembered the time when I was a
boy and my father sent me to buy rum from the local store, and I thought
that if any classmate saw me with the liquor, I would hold my breath and
die of shame.This is exactly what happens to me every time I am sent to
buy bread. I am happy to be seen holding a Chetan Bhagat, but not bread.
White bread, brown bread, other bread are, for all practical purposes,
blobs of sugar.About five years ago, I quit all kinds of grain in the
hope of running the half marathon in under 85 minutes. Some days I
yield, but I know that modern mainstream food is a civilizational
failure and a diabolic triumph of culture, which is the delivery device
of a drug called sugar. You might be happy to learn that the latest diet
book to hit India argues that people like me are completely wrong.

It is Dr Dhurandhar’s Fat-Loss Diet by Nikhil Dhurandhar, whom the actor
Aamir Khan had consulted for his role in the film Dangal, in which Khan
had first gained a lot of kilos and then lost almost all of it to gain
muscle.The book is compassionate about the entire spectrum of the human
condition, including ignorance. One woman who had come to the doctor to
solve her obesity problem thought she was fat because cold winter air
was trapped in her. Another woman had come to him after the failure of a
therapy that involved being beaten with a cricket bat—to “break down"
her fats.

But the most compassionate aspect of the book is in asking you to
continue to eat what you love as long as you reduce the portions and
shift protein-heavy meals to daytime. The doctor is a man who appears to
accept that life is worth living chiefly because of the decadence of
food. He even lets you have dessert. He himself consumes them. In fact,
he is most compassionate about sugar, and highly refined grain like
maida and white rice, which release sugar quickly into the bloodstream.
Every diet, like all good stories, needs a villain, and his is
old-fashioned—fat. This makes the book highly unusual.

Processed carbohydrates are the most disgraced forms of food in modern
scientific dieting. Fat—like oil, butter and ghee—has been rehabilitated
and recognized as a victim of the campaigns of the sugar lobby. I have
full faith in this hypothesis. In my own experience, and the experience
of those who are close to me, I have seen the extraordinary and
transformative benefits of quitting grain, especially refined grain.

In most cultures, especially Indian, the very act of asking a person to
quit grain is devoid of compassion. Carbohydrates from wheat and rice
work exactly like a drug and the immediate consequence of quitting, for
most people, is sorrow. Also, they are then confused about what exactly
they must eat as the very anchor of all meals is food made from grain.

In Why We Get Fat, which was released in 2010, Gary Taubes makes an
argument that is compassionate but he limits his compassion to the fact
that excess weight is not a character flaw. The genes and hormonal
regulation in most people, and not food, make them grow fatter as they
age. We do not become fat because we overeat, he writes, we overeat
because we are fat. “Anything that increases its mass, for whatever
reason, will take in more energy than it expends."

That overeating is the effect of becoming fat, and not the cause, has to
be the most compassionate argument in dieting. For those who are unlucky
enough to store fat easily—most of the world actually—there is one piece
of information that can transform their bodies and health. Why and how
do people get fat? The main character in the drama is a hormone called
insulin, which has a Pavlovian connection with carbohydrates. “You think
about eating a meal containing carbohydrates," writes Taubes, and you
begin to secrete insulin, which alters the flows of fatty acids in the
cells, in turn making you hungrier. When you begin to eat, you secrete
more insulin. The refined carbs you consume meanwhile quickly enter the
bloodstream as glucose, a sugar, which makes the body release even more
insulin, which works to ensure that we do not burn our fat as energy and
instead store it in our fat cells in the form of a large cluster of
three molecules called triglyceride. The triglyceride, once formed, is
too large to leave the fat cell, he says, like a piece of furniture that
has been assembled in a room and cannot be taken out in one piece.

“If we can get our insulin levels to drop sufficiently low...we can burn
our fat. If we can’t, we won’t." And refined carbs are the major
contributors to the secretion of insulin, which is the only hormone in
the body that works to make us fatter. This is all we need to know to be
lean.

The central compassion of Dr Dhurandhar is in the advocacy of
moderation. He does not ask you to abstain from grain and sugar, but
reduce the quantity. Compassion is an effective way to persuade people
to make realistic changes. Most people do not wish for perfection at the
expense of habit and fun; something reasonable will do. That is why
moderation is more popular than abstinence. But this is precisely the
reason why most people will fail to lose fat or get healthier.
Moderation is compassionate but intrinsically ineffective compared to
abstinence. His most famous client, Aamir Khan, did not achieve his goal
through moderation.

Abstinence gives you a clear direction. There is no confusion. It is all
or nothing. Moderation is ambiguous. At times it is as fantastical as
Barack Obama’s imagination of the “moderate Taliban". The totality and
wisdom of abstinence is the only way to quit powerful addictions and
stay that way, as present and former smokers know. Also, human nature is
such that abstinence occasionally becomes moderation anyway, but
moderation always balloons into excess. If we consider the seven deadly
sins, human society has been able to abstain from these vices with the
help of religious and ethical pressure. These have slowly escalated to
the level of moderation. If our religions had allowed these vices in
moderation, whole civilizations would have collapsed in complete
decadence.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
