# Insulting the &#8216;cute&#8217; old through admiration

*2018-12-09*

Last week, the video clip of an old sardar’s salsa with a sari-draped
woman reached hundreds of thousands of people. Everyone presumed the
twirling woman was his wife because the moment was adorable only then.
Also, everyone wanted to frame the dance as a “sweet” evidence of love
and the persistence of happiness. People also imagined the couple had
been married for decades. Maybe they also thought he smears toothpaste
on her brush every morning before she rises. A common reaction among
viewers was that the couple was, by the act of salsa, “keeping their
love alive”. When people talk in public about love, you will think they
have never been in a relationship.

The public reaction to the video was actually not a collective
appreciation of enduring love. Something else was going on. It was
condescension for the old, and it was condescension masquerading as
admiration. In using words like “sweet” and “cute” for the old man and
his partner of ambiguous (hence probably advanced) age, people were
inadvertently exposing their opinion that they consider the old to be
inferior humans who are normally incapable of elementary dancing. In
presuming that they were married, people inadvertently revealed their
opinion that love is an equal handicap—the old must not aspire beyond
the old.

What if the same old man was in fact a sugar-daddy billionaire and his
partner was a 20-year-old model? What if he were an old man who wished
to be “in the game”? Suddenly the same dance would make him despicable
because he would now be a potent male, not a “cute” old man who
restricts himself to be in the company of an old woman.

You may say there was a bit of compassion in the people who rejoiced the
salsa. Of course, there was. In fact, condescension usually masquerades
as compassion. In The Unbearable Lightness Of Being, Milan Kundera
pauses the narration of the story to explain that the word “compassion”
ought to read that it “generally inspires suspicion” because, even
though compassion can be a glorious human emotion in some people, it so
often is merely covert condescension—“it designates what is considered
an inferior, second-rate sentiment that has little to do with love”.

Admiration is worse because it hides disdain much more efficiently than
compassion. Being old is a caste and most of us are racists. And a mark
of our times is that the most vicious racists don’t insult—they
appreciate, they patronise. There is a bit of this even in the effusive
compliments of the young for the middle-aged. “I have a crush” and “you
are so hot” when directed by the young towards the old are so often, if
not always, feudal moments of patronage.

The salsa video is among the occasional “old-persons” video that goes
viral every now and then. An old woman does cartwheels, and the world,
which is filled with the unfit lazy young, patronises her. An old man
describes his late wife as “angelic” and people advertise they want to
cry.

The most atrocious clip was recorded by a gang of young girls outside an
airport. In the film, a very old man waits outside the arrival gate
holding a bouquet. He is unaware, of course, that he is being recorded
from a good distance. An old woman arrives and he gives her the flowers.
The world swooned over the apparent beauty of the moment.

What if the old man was, in fact, having a secret affair? Maybe he was
tired of his bickering 75-year-old wife and wished to feel the smooth
skin and firmer breasts of a 65-year-old woman.

You may argue, because you don’t want me to ruin beauty, that when we
admire the joy of the old, we are seeing ourselves in the future, and
the hope that we, too, will give and receive bouquets (from and to a
respectably old person). But if you observe the language of our
admiration, inside our heads and outside, we will see that this is not
how we speak to ourselves. We never talk down to future selves, but we
do so to the old.

Even the great Roger Federer has to face the absurdity of the ordinary
young patronising him. Every time he wins, it is seen in the context of
his age. The reason why journalists consider 40-year-old athletes as
handicaps is that most journalists are unfit. Every now and then, I
tweet a plea to editors, “Only journalists who can run 100m in under 15
seconds should be allowed to comment on Federer’s fitness” (I suggest 15
seconds because that is the time I am assured to run 100m if challenged
at any given time of the day).

The unfit young usually overreact to the fitness of the older. In this
way and other ways, the world, which has a low bar for itself, has
created a very low bar for the old, too, while in actuality a regular
60-year-old who is fit can have the physique and innards of a
30-year-old. Instead, the old are nudged everyday to think of themselves
as handicaps. When they are tired or weak, they don’t realise even the
young feel tired; they are certain, it is an inevitability of age. They
also grow to ignore physical vanity, whose contribution to the very
meaning of life is underrated.

The reactions to old-people-doing-cute-stuff videos are on a par with
other subtle acts of patronising, like the overblown reaction to
sari-clad scientists of the Indian space programme.

The cuteness of “jugaad”, too, and the glorification of Rajinikanth’s
comical gentrification. And “the dignity” of impoverished farmers on
protests in Delhi and Mumbai who are complimented for not creating
traffic jams or disrupting middle-class lives.

Manu Joseph, a journalist and a novelist, most recent of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous, was a Mint Lounge columnist.

Comments are welcome at views@livemint.com
