# What Madras taught me about going home

*2018-01-20*

The cricket icon Krishnamachari Srikkanth reached into his shirt for the
sacred thread and did not find it for a moment. Upon finding it he
showed it to the strangers in the room and said that he is proud to be a
Hindu. He said he is a “Hindu guy, Hindutva guy". And he said, “This is
a Hindu country." In the authors’ lounge at The Hindu’s literature
festival last week, he was having an informal conversation after
learning the topic of an impending panel discussion—“Why is India’s
secular nationalism under attack?". “This is Hindustan," he said, “This
is Hindustan. We are only letting Muslims and Christians live with us."

I was surprised but the reason is not what you probably have in mind. I
have never heard a Tamilian say “Hindustan" before. The rest of what he
said did not bother me. My first two decades were in Chennai and I am
accustomed to people speaking their minds and when they are at it,
pulling their poonal (sacred thread) out, and even groping for it first.
Usually they say things with no malice.

It was inevitable that something about science will follow. “I can
scientifically prove in 15 minutes that India is a Hindu country," he
said.

“All right," I said.

“I can prove it in 5 minutes actually," he said, gathering his thoughts.
Then he said, “Or at least you will not be able to scientifically
disprove it." The scientific proof never came.

I was home. My childhood was filled with such moments. Even nationalism
never seemed morbid when you heard it in Chennai. It is more comic
lament than threat. And I love how even in its most stupid moments the
city will invoke science. It is never some sacred book, or a quote, in
Chennai it is usually science. “I will scientifically prove that…" There
is a long list of things that can fill the blanks, and they are a
parallel emotional history of the great loveable city.

Do we love only what is good and what is excellent? When we are asked
why we love what we love we search for great reasons. Maybe that is not
necessary. When I left Madras (now Chennai) in 1995, through its giant
railway station, I was fleeing a dirty parched chaotic corrupt ugly
nepotistic city for better prospects and hopefully sexual decadence, and
since then refused to accept that I had any love for a mere place just
because I spent the first 20 years of my life there. People who spoke
with great affection about their unremarkable hometowns, I thought, were
only exhibiting the delirium of narcissism. But I am now developing an
affection for Chennai as the allure of homelessness is fading. What is
so wrong to belong to a place? I always thought something was wrong with
that sort of thinking. I thought we can never be free if we belong. But
that is a tiring sort of existence.

The modern urban Indian is a cultural orphan, as a result he keeps
finding false homes. In ideologies, faiths, moral convictions and cosy
clubs and foreign cultures that do not care about him. Maybe we should
just fall towards our real homes, the places that raised us. What the
hometown has is time, our epic early histories. We love nothing more
than ourselves and what we see in the hometown is ourselves.

People tell me that Chennai has changed a lot since the time I left it
but I see mostly the same city. Men do not bounce on their dowry
scooters to kick-start them, but I can still steal from my novel that
was set in the Madras of the 1990s to describe the Chennai of today. In
the mornings, in the TamBrahm colony where I grew up, as in many other
lanes, there is still the fragrance of the same paradisiacal breakfasts,
and the chant of Carnatic singer M.S. Subbulakshmi from a thousand
devices. Cycling to some tutorial is still the same type of a young
man—antiquated, a thick steel watch on the wrist, oiled hair combed in
the good-boy hairstyle, and looking like the past of an old man.

Actor Rajinikanth has been gentrified, which is where his cinematic
destruction lies, but he is still a public mascot of the city. The
hoarding painters still paint his face pink instead of black. Hysteria
is still a dialect of Tamil.

The Chennai of my time is in turn an ancient way of the world. My new
affection for my roots is, apart from narcissism, a result of a fatigue
with a kind of modernity that requires you to be homeless. When you are
homeless you are perpetually in the sway of dominant cultures, and I am
sick of both the north Indian and Western ways. To be modern now is, at
times, beginning to feel clownish. Also, the idea of “global" is clearly
more farcical than liberal. “Global" is a quality that exists only in
relation to the West; “global" is what white people call that part of
human culture that is distant and exotic but still comprehensible to
them. This we know from “global literature", “global cinema", “global
food" and other such inanities.

We do not know what we are when we are global, we have a better grasp
over ourselves when we see ourselves at home, as creations of what our
hometowns taught us to love and hate, accept and reject. What may have
Madras taught me? That melodrama is not a form of mediocrity. That an
actor knows acting only if he can cry and laugh at the same time,
everyone else is just making faces. That ultimately how you fight
colonizers is not flinging grenades at them but by persisting with your
traditions and tiring them out. That we should be secretive about
important things. That at any given moment in the world, someone is a
Brahmin, someone is not, and what the Brahmin loves is always called
culture, and what the others love is called folk.

I had once renounced the idea of home because I thought I had no use of
it. It was an unfair place for a person with no social networks and I
had prospered outside it. Also, I thought being attached to my hometown
will make me a petty village romantic who confused self-absorption with
heritage and conservation. But then, it now appears that I was never
really too far from home. As the 18th century German writer Novalis
wrote, “Where are we really going? Always home."

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous.

He tweets at @manujosephsan
