# How is good news actually transmitted?

*2018-06-30*

One morning in January, Amish Tripathi gave me a lift. The writer whose
fiction has sold a few million copies told me, “There are three kinds of
readers." I am usually never with people who say, “There are three kinds
of readers," so I grew very alert. “The first kind are those who read
over 50 books a year." He meant “50" in a metaphorical way; he meant
readers who read a lot of books. “They form a minuscule proportion of
readers," he said. “The people who read your novels are probably among
them." The second kind of readers, he said, “read one, or maybe five
books a year. My readers are among them." And the third category, he
said, “read one book in their lifetime". Honour, according to him, is to
write that only book hundreds of thousands of Indians will ever read in
their lives. I was struck by a thought at that instant. He had,
inadvertently, explained the mystery of word-of-mouth. When people say
something to their friends about a book, a film, a restaurant or even a
political idea, what decides how far their words will go? How is good
news transmitted?

In our analysis of word-of-mouth, we usually consider who is talking,
and how many of them, and even where they are talking from. We imagine a
hierarchy of influencers with highly sophisticated or powerful people in
urban centres on top, their words flowing down the social order. Is this
the only way positive news can be transmitted? There is an aspect we
usually do not consider that might be important. In word-of-mouth, what
is the tone of the word? Is there a hierarchy of tones, too, in the
order of influence, and who is capable of the most influential tone?

People who read “more than 50 books" do talk a lot about books—but also
about a lot of books. It is rare for them to speak ecstatically about a
single book, especially a new release or an Indian novel, even if they
loved it. People who read “one book a year", or less than five a year,
speak with more passion about books. They may say that they do not read
as many books as they wish to because they do not have the time but we
know that is nonsense—we always have time for what we want, and to those
who love reading, the act is so fundamental that they find the time. So
the fact is this category is not addicted to reading, or has not been
converted to the powerful overstated notion (promoted by writers, of
course, among others) that reading is some great virtuous human
activity, or they do not have the power of concentration, and, as a
result, find it hard to read. So when they do finish a book, it is
because there is something in it that has made them transcend their
resistance to reading, and they are, as a result, blown away by the book
or by their own effort. They speak for weeks about the astonishing book,
the way people speak of a discovery, and they speak very simply and very
well to others like them, who constitute a majority of the literate
population. They are more useful to the books they love than most widely
read people.

Now, imagine the person who has read only one book in his life. He will
be nothing short of evangelical when he speaks of that only book he
could complete.

Word-of-mouth, very simply, is the great favour done by the naïve, by
which I mean the fresh, the young, the good-natured optimists, the
inexperienced, the new, the amateur.

You will never hear much about long-distance running from an African
runner who finishes the marathon in under 130 minutes. As this column
had once argued, it’s the plodding amateurs in the infancy of old age
who go on and on about it. And it is not a coincidence that most people
who speak about spirituality and meditation are agonized souls that have
never known quiet. And it should not surprise us that the amount most
women talk and read about sex is disproportionate to their actual sexual
appetite in relation to men.

The initial success of the Anna Hazare movement was a direct consequence
of a politically naïve Indian urban middle class overestimating what was
just another street demonstration. Note that Hazare did not move the
middle classes of Kerala and West Bengal, places where that class was
very familiar with political engagement.

There are, of course, several forces that push an idea out into the
world. There is the establishment using its many channels to transmit
works that conform to its idea of excellence. There is the chaos of
unpredictable events, there is the bias of the audience, there is dumb
luck. But among the most important and underrated is the collective
chatter of the naïve in the enigma of new discoveries. It appears that
in some situations we transmit farthest when we are not the core target
group of that which is being transmitted.

The first time I read a work of non-fiction, I was about 14, and the
book was the autobiography of Pelé. I confused book for genre and
celebrated the book for inventing autobiography. What I was struck by
was not just a book, but a whole product line. I talked about it for
days. Later, when I read Cosmos by Carl Sagan, I went around town
explaining the universe to many people. I was about 17 when I read
Midnight’s Children by Salman Rushdie. It was the first time I was
reading a book which informed me that reading a story can be hard work,
and it was the first time I was encountering magic in a serious story
that had long words, like “tintinnabulations", and it was the first time
I was reading a writer who was a famous political victim. It was the
first time I felt important while reading a book, and I was its greatest
ambassador in Chennai for years to come. Recently, when I re-read the
novel, I could not recognize the book I so loved.

I spoke best about books when I was young and naïve. Now, when I talk of
books, I make most of them sound unremarkable, which they may not be.

The struggles of art, or what is considered art, like the “literary
novel" and “arthouse movie", and its existence at the mercy of the
establishment is not because the world is dumb, as artists wish to
claim. Art often fails to reach out to the most efficient transmitters
of good news—the naïve.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous. He tweets at @manujosephsan
