# Why the streets of Amsterdam are so joyful

*2018-07-28*

People having fun are like cattle; they almost never look up. But at
times someone tries to drink the last drop from the glass and that makes
them look up and it is then that they see me. A brown guy framed by a
massive window in an ancient home staring down at them, and they are
generally so happy they find this, too, amusing.

There has been no respite from happiness. At this very moment too, as I
write these words, I can hear a roar of laughter. That is because I am
in the heart of Amsterdam and it is evening. If you come to its famous
cobbled square, Spui, you will see a row of red and brown homes that
were built a few centuries ago, which lean a bit forward. In one of
those buildings, on the third floor is the window where you will see me
staring at you, and at the roaring, chattering crowds drinking below in
the cafés. It is like this every evening. Different people every day but
they remarkably sound the same and there will always be one guy with a
deep valedictory guffaw, and one woman with a piercing incredulous
scream. Maybe she is only pretending to enjoy some guy’s joke, who
knows. From my window I can also see the entrance of a “Coffee Shop",
which in Amsterdam means a place where you can buy cannabis. About 50m
away, you can also buy magic mushrooms.

The fun on my street begins every day long before the daylight starts to
fade, which is around 10pm, and the carnival goes on till 3am, less than
2 hours before the daylight returns, when the seagulls come to peck at
the litter of the fun, with a loud squabbling screeches that make
pigeons sound reasonable.

I am here on the invitation of the Dutch Foundation for Literature to
lock myself up in a hermitage in a flat above Spui. When I arrived I was
working on an argument that people find it hard to be happy, especially
those with no real problems, because happiness is not a right as we have
been told all these years. We make a mess of happiness because happiness
is in reality a duty, a duty to enjoy our own simple good luck but it is
hard to stay with this thought in Amsterdam where, at least on first
glance, everyone appears to perform his duty to be happy.

In the city, a curious exhibition is underway. On display are human body
parts, most of them genuine parts sourced from cadavers, of course. The
theme of the exhibition is the popular but disputed view that happiness
contributes to health. The exhibition shows what lifestyle does to some
of our important organs. The moral of the show is that we should be
happy. This is among the fringe shows in the city where there are
spectacular events all through the year, and of course, the Van Gogh and
Rembrandt House museums, and the Rijksmuseum, and the house where Anne
Frank lived and wrote her diary.

As in many great European cities, there is much street joy in Amsterdam,
a current of fun we do not see in India, the republic which is against
fun. Generations of godmen have claimed that Indians have a monopoly
over joy, a claim that has attracted millions of lost white people to
us, but we know that our streets have somehow never belonged to the
happy. Sitting by this very window in Amsterdam I read that Goa’s chief
minister Manohar Parrikar, having returned from death, has announced
that he will fine anyone caught drinking in public in his state. In
Amsterdam, too, there are such laws but in practice people spill out of
bars, into the sidewalks, on the roads.

It has been a good summer in Amsterdam. The long days are dry, and they
are stunned by sunlight. I have bought a second-hand cycle. There are
400km of bike lanes in Amsterdam, but as an Indian, I don’t always stay
on the lanes. Actually, by the standards of white people, the Dutch are
not that orderly on the roads.

The deepest street joys in Amsterdam are not in its raucous evenings but
in its silent mornings. In how the blue trams vanish down the bends. In
the glorious women in short dresses cycling somewhere; lovers kissing
for so long as though one of them is going to depart in a train forever,
but then when they finally stop kissing, they continue to walk. Men sit
in narrow lanes and look carefully at women and pass comments. In the
red light district, women stand behind windows, some of them gorgeous
beyond subjectivity, as great hordes pass them by. Men of all ages stare
with incredulity at the certainty that, just for €50, they can sleep
with a very beautiful woman, or at the certainty that they can escape so
easily the casteism of love that favours the successful over the losers;
just open a door, that is it. There is more joy though in the large
parks of the city where people wallow in families and domesticated men
cycle with two children, their hair flailing, in a cart attached to
their cycles. In the many canals of the city, tourists go in boats
gawking at the ancient buildings that flank the waterways. Hitler chose
not to destroy Amsterdam probably because at the time it was not so
important to destroy it. So most of its past, across centuries, still
stands.

Is so much happiness, and richness, in plain sight vulgar? Especially
for the unhappy and the unfortunate. To be a loser, or to be physically
or socially defeated, in such places is more painful than being so in
India**,** where the fallen have the companionship of the majority.

I tell a Dutch interviewer that from an Indian’s point of view,
Amsterdam is so outwardly joyous that I feel I am inside the Facebook
page of a whole town. As a native of Amsterdam, she is not so sure
though that the Dutch are happy. Many locals tell me that. One fiction
editor told me with a chuckle, “As you go north of Amsterdam, the
suicide rate shoots up."

Once you tire of the city, the best thing to do is cycle to the rural
areas, maybe to Twiske, which is a pastoral place by the woods. In the
Netherlands you can walk alone in the wilderness confident that you are
on the top of the food chain. That is what is, finally, Christian about
the region. All animals are subordinate to the human, and so the great
beasts have been long destroyed. And if you tire of the joys too, and
want to see some domestic trauma, just keep a close watch on families on
vacation—they never disappoint.

Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous. Read his previous columns at
livemint.com/moderntimes

He tweets @manujosephsan
