# Sabarimala and the dangers of overrating arguments

*2019-01-06*

About 15 years ago, I visited a Hindu temple in Karachi. At the entrance
stood a Hindu male in a Pathan suit waving a cane to drive away Muslims.
Every now and then he screamed, “Jai Shiv Shankar”. When I tried to
enter, he told me that Muslims were not allowed inside. I told him I was
Indian. He asked to see my passport. He was confused when he learned I
had a Christian surname, but because I was Indian, he decided to let me
in. I told him I would have thought it very dangerous for a Hindu to
stand in a temple in the heart of Karachi and wave a stick at Muslims to
deny them entry. He said he had rights. In another temple in the city, I
saw a group of Muslim girls begging a cantankerous old woman to let them
in. We just want to look, they said. “Then go to the zoo,” the
unyielding old woman said.

When I reported this, Indians who rated freedoms higher than cultural
norms marvelled at the phenomenon, which they interpreted not as
discrimination against the Muslims of Pakistan but as a minority’s
exquisite right to practise their faith by following its cultural norms.

Now they hold a very different view in a very similar matter. After the
Supreme Court ruled that the autonomy of the temple at Sabarimala was
subordinate to the rights of women of menstruating age to enter it,
there is a view in the mainstream intellectual community that if we
aspire to be refined and modern, we must accept that all religious
wounds are subordinate to any woman’s right to enter any place of
worship.

I am in Kerala right now and when I ask people about the issue, I get
very familiar answers. The atheists, who covertly or overtly feel that
believers in God are fools, say religion must reform. The believers in
God, including young women, say the ban on women is not such a great
evil that atheists should try to “reform” a cultural code. They point
out that women of all faiths are allowed in Ayyappan temples but in
Sabarimala, the God is present as a celibate, who does not wish to see
the allure of women. Atheists find this laughable. But believers say it
is bizarre that the world must consider the fable of religion extremely
important, yet tinker with its story arcs. By the way, by “believers in
God”, I don’t mean those who say “I believe in a force” or some such
bull, but I certainly include staunch Christians and Muslims.

There are no clinching arguments in this debate. Both sides have very
powerful arguments. The controversy, in fact, exposes the true nature of
arguments. An argument appears to substantiate a belief, it appears to
come inside a person’s head to build a case, but in reality, if I may
repeat a point I have made earlier in this paper, an argument is a
reverse engineering of a religious moment. We believe first and then we
discover or plagiarise strong corroborations to dress up our faiths,
including “scientific” faiths.

Yet, in all walks of modern life, arguments have risen in primacy
because they provide the farcical optics of democratic procedure. It is
this cultural pre-eminence of arguments in our age that gave the Supreme
Court the confidence which the Kerala high court did not have in 1991—to
resolve after hearing “arguments” an issue that is in actuality
impossible to argue.

Let us look at some of the arguments:

■ Once “low-castes” were denied entry into temples. Courts intervened.
Religious sentiments were hurt, but now everyone is fine with it. This
is how faith is reformed.

■ The “low-castes” wished to enter the temples, so it was a right that
they sought. But women who believe in Ayyappan did not ask for the right
to enter the shrine. It is a right sought and won by atheists, who do
not care about religious practices.

■ The idea that any aspect of women is impure or that women are an
embodiment of something alluring alone has no place in the modern
society. Also, in the future, female believers of Ayyappan may have a
very different view from their mothers.

■ On what moral authority are a handful of people deciding these matters
for a majority?

■ Can law colonise faith?

■ In any case, in any civilised society, faith is subordinate to the
law. The temple’s moral code did not kill people. The Supreme Court’s
verdict did. At times, the intervention of an unqualified group of
intellectuals can be very dangerous.

■ Political thugs cannot be allowed to hold democracy hostage.

■ Law is subordinate to emotions of the public. The people who want
women to enter the shrine are those who have no stake in how the public
feels. But politicians do. This is exactly why major ambassadors of
liberal values, like Shashi Tharoor, are opposed to the entry of women.
Politicians, except the communists, have made very “conservative”
statements.

■ The court is above public sentiments.

■ If judges can lean on “the collective conscience of the nation” to
hang people, then maybe they should also respect the “conscience” when
it enacts law.

Only people who are infected by ideology can find a moral hierarchy for
such arguments. Yet, the Supreme Court did exactly that.

In such arguments, “liberals” usually use the future as a trump card.
The present is defamed as an inferior time, and the future is promoted
as something that has to be “better” than the present. But the present
is an important dimension in any cultural debate. We live in the
present, we are wounded in the present.

If you keep pampering the future, you will disregard the present of the
people, and they will drag the future deep into the past.

Manu Joseph a journalist and a novelist, was a Mint Lounge columnist.
