# What an ideal fellowship of bald men could teach us

*2019-10-20*

As some men know, a consequence of losing hair is gaining face. They
might be among the 500 men who have formed a new fellowship called the
All-Kerala Bald-Headed People’s Association. According to a news report,
the idea of the club came from a film actor, who soon quit and remains
anonymous. He was probably unwilling to be exposed as a bald man, which
disqualifies him in any case because the objective of the association is
to somehow “flaunt” baldness and end its shame.

The spirit of the club is admirable to all self-assured bald and balding
men, but its language is suspiciously influenced by the organized lament
industry. A foreboding of the club’s future uselessness is in one of its
slogans: “Bald is beautiful”. As it is, most alliterations are daft, but
calling bald “beautiful” is far worse than daft—an admission of defeat.
When you plan a rebellion against the order of things, you should not
profess to be a part of the order. That’s surrender, not uprising. What
the oppressor controls should not be dear to the rebel. So, what the
baldies should be telling the world is: “Beauty is not all there is to
life.” Instead, the association is framing the world of bald men like
how the left frames the world in general—as a place teeming with
villains and their victims who need the comfort of nonsensical
compliments.

The fact is that if tomorrow there is a real solution to baldness that
is not very expensive and has no side-effects, all bald men will “cure”
themselves. Handsome bald men will become handsome men with hair; and
unattractive bald men will become unattractive men with hair. All
bald-men’s clubs in the world will cease to exist. As baldness concerns
men, mostly, the condition is not so sacred yet, unlike other forms of
victimhood. Therefore, we can still state truths about it plainly, and
we can see the idiocy of empathetic slogans like “bald is beautiful”.

The fellowship of bald men has more meaning than the farcical bonds many
communities share. Bald men are a creation of a small set of mysterious
genes, whose purpose is not known. Natural selection would have
abolished baldness and denied millions of bald men the lottery of life
if only, during our primitive ages, baldness had occurred in early
adolescence rather than later. Bald men are the proof that not every
mutation needs to have a reason that should favour man. Things happen
for no reason. Evolution is not progress; evolution is merely change.
That is the meaning of bald men.

Seen this way, a bald man has more intelligent reasons to cheer the
success of other bald men than Indians have in celebrating the success
of remote foreigners of “Indian origin”. A few days ago, when Abhijit
Banerjee won the economics Nobel Prize, the pride of the alumni of
Jawaharlal Nehru University for the triumph of one of its own, and of
the citizens of Kolkata for the man who once lived there, and of many
Bengalis across the world, reminded me of a poem by G.K. Chesterton in
which a donkey that is carrying Jesus Christ thinks huge crowds have
come to worship it. Bald men of the world have a greater claim to be a
single clan thanmany Indian groups.

Larry David, bald man and the co-creator of *Seinfeld*, captured the
fellowship of baldness very often in his other show, the exquisite *Curb
Your Enthusiasm*. Once, after a girl abuses him as a “bald a\*\*hole”,
he tells police officers, “That’s a hate crime. We consider ourselves to
be a group.” When the officer tells him, “I’m bald and I’m not
offended,” David says: “With all due respect, officer Berg, you are not
bald. You’ve chosen to shave your hair and that’s a look you’re
cultivating in order to look fashionable, but we don’t really consider
you part of the bald community...”

People often misunderstand humour as caricature. It is, at times, but
often the evidence that a hypothesis is true is in a measure of how
funny the hypothesis is.

The very features that make David argue, somewhat convincingly, lends
baldness a degree of seriousness. Millions of bald men do go through
their lives looking like the “before” picture in hair-transplant ads,
which show a dejected bald man transforming into a happy man with a mop
of hair. Many bald men who are unattractive or innately unsure of
themselves blame their baldness just like the depressed mistake heads of
state as the cause of their melancholy.

In Gabriel García Márquez’s *Love In The Time Of Cholera*, a balding man
searches for a cure for years: “He memorized the agricultural
information in the Bristol Almanac because he had heard that there was a
direct relationship between the growth of hair and the harvesting
cycles. He left the totally bald barber he had used all his life for a
foreign newcomer who cut hair only when the moon was in the first
quarter.”

In spirit, this is not very different from the quest of modern bald men.
To liberate such men, Kerala’s “bald-headed people’s association” plans
to groan about self-respect and make bald men run marathons. Instead,
they should consider taking an element from capitalistic self-interest
and joyous decadence. They should create a club that uses baldness only
as a norm for entry; nothing else about the fellowship should be about
the condition. They should become a network of influential bald men who
put together extraordinary and entertaining events; they should get
special deals on every material service for the bald.

To make people happy, there needs to be no lament.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.*
