# How the old elite managed to co-opt Kanhaiya Kumar

*2019-04-21*

A few years ago, the Indian edition of Vogue ran a fashion spread that
featured poor Indians holding expensive objects, including a Burberry
umbrella and an Hermes Birkin bag. Outrageerupted across India—chiefly
from the Zara constituency, where most of the righteous exist, but also
the Hermes crowd. In August last year, they may have seen another image
of a poor Indian holding a luxury item, but they were not offended. In
fact, they loved it. It was a photograph of 31-year-old Kanhaiya Kumar
standing with his mother holding a bound copy of his “African Studies”
doctoral thesis.

At first glance, it is a happy photograph. He was submitting his thesis
to his mother who, he tweeted, “never let poverty interfere with my
dreams”.

Embedded in this happy photograph is also a sad image if we know how to
frame it. A bright young man from a poor family, who had no interest in
science or mathematics, was compelled by an omnipresent elite influence
to invest the best years of his life in higher education in the luxury
streams of humanities. He first graduated in geography, and devoted his
twenties to a doctorate at Jawaharlal Nehru University, which often
serves as the refuge of arts students who want to escape adult life.

What Nehruvians call an aspiration of the poor is in reality co-option
by the rich. The poor, especially the smart, are always co-opted into
systems where the rich hold all the cards. That is how the rich win. It
is cruel that Kanhaiya’s thesis must be titled *The Process Of
Decolonization And Social Transformation In South Africa*. For what he
had surrendered to, by pursuing the mythical prestige of a doctoral
thesis, was a form of colonization in itself.

It would be unspeakably foolish to think that knowledge is meant for the
rich alone, but there is something about the formal pursuit of degrees
in the humanities that is wasteful if you are a very poor man.

A few months ago, Kanhaiya Kumar said that Narendra Modi was an
“incompetent” son. It is possible that Kanhaiya’s mother does not think
that of her own son, though his protracted education did not alter the
fact that she was and still is a poor woman.

Most of us who were not dealt a good hand in our lives devoted our
twenties to finding ways to prosper. We stood in queues in post offices
to send money to our mothers, and one day we wondrously wired the same.
Kanhaiya Kumar, though, was in African Studies, and he was immersed in
student politics, whose relationship with real life is that of
tennis-ball cricket to a test-match.

But then isn’t it true that Kanhaiya Kumar has succeeded? If it were not
for the long asylum of JNU and its student politics, where he was
elected president of the students union, he may have become a nameless
underpaid journalist who is co-opted by activism, which is journalism at
a 50% discount. And what is so great about becoming a call-centre
employee or another kind of a corporate slave?

Instead, today Kanhaiya Kumar is a man who has some sway over millions
of poor Indians. He says humane things in Hindi, a language that has, in
recent times, become a medium of facile aggression and hatred. And he
says it all like a stand-up comedian. He is a comedian who is not called
a comedian, a writer who is not considered a writer, a theatre actor who
is not known as an actor. People underestimate how powerful it is to be
what the world does not think you are. He is also a politician who is
not fully identified as a politician. All this happened because he
surrendered to co-option by old elites in the humanities.

But then, the accident of his success, the accident of a foolish move by
the Modi government that converted Kanhaiya Kumar into a martyr and
brought national attention to his exquisite oratorial skills, masks a
bleak truth. There are hundreds of thousands of smart young men like him
who are co-opted into systems that limit their lives, or even deeply
harm them.

The late Rohith Vemula, once a student of the University of Hyderabad,
is an example of a boy who did not make it. Though he wished to be a
science writer, he abandoned microbiology for sociology, an academic
discipline that appears to be a nest of melancholic left-wing activism.
He did not realize that the negativity of the left in India is merely
the grouse of one set of elites who have lost their prestige to another
set of elites. They transmit a lot of negativity but then go back to
their aesthetic spaces. Boys like Vemula return to their depressing
hostel rooms that smell of Margo soap, damp walls and sweaty lungis.
Activism is an extremely dangerous space for the depressed among the
poor.

Even Kanhaiya Kumar almost did not make it. Until he was saved by
politics—real politics. That is what is common between him and his
arch-enemy, Narendra Modi. Both of them were poor men who would have
amounted to nothing if it were not for politics. India is rigged in such
a way that apart from sports, the only sphere where the talented poor
can do well is mass politics.

But then, even as a politician—currently as a Lok Sabha candidate of the
Communist Party of India for the Begusarai constituency in
Bihar—Kanhaiya Kumar seems to have been co-opted by the same old elites.

For a sanctimonious man who frequently expresses disdain for capitalism,
he is now part a political organisation that looks like a farcical
derivative of some thought experiments of two wealthy German migrants
that the world took too seriously.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.*
