# How the country’s many flaws and evils create jobs

*2019-06-28*

Three malnourished men in paramilitary costumes check the car as it
enters the hotel. One security guard has an under-vehicle search mirror
that looks more expensive than he. The second man gestures the driver to
open the boot. The third man looks into the boot, and no one in the
world knows what he is looking for. Across the nation, outside every
hotel and mall, the man who peers into the boot and into the car will
ignore huge suitcases and bags, probably even corpses. His job is just
to look and wave you through. These men were once farmers, scholars of
the land, and now earn more doing such jobs in the city. Maybe their
real job is not to deter a terror attack but to be the first to take the
bullets so that richer people inside can be warned by the sound.

At the entrance of any given Indian airport, another man in a
legally-sanctioned paramilitary outfit stands for hours and checks
flight tickets and identity cards of all passengers, even though he
would not be able to spot a fabricated flight ticket or ID. Inside, in
the toilets, there may be that little dark defeated man staring at you
as you urinate, waiting to hand out a tissue paper which would have been
easier to pick from a non-human tissue paper holder. And, across all
glitzy public spaces, one see couples trailed by a pale Jharkhand maid,
in cheaper clothes, who carries their baby. In millions of Indian homes,
there are two maids, some of whom peel pine nuts for hours. India is a
vast play with bad costumes.

And, there is the Indian Railways, which still has “pointsmen”, who
could be women too, whose job is to stand near a track to hand over a
small object called a “token” to the engine driver as the train hurtles
past at about 100 kmph. The token is an official communication to the
driver that he can pass, a job that an electronic signal performs
better. The railways is primarily an employment scheme that also runs
trains.

Many powerful men in the past have declared that they will privatise the
railways, but eventually never found the courage to do it. Indians make
fun of the government for being overstaffed with underemployed people,
but the fact is that every Indian home is exactly that—serviced by
drivers and “chhotus”, who spend hours idling, playing cards and
watching porn beneath trees everyday.

India’s many flaws, taken together, are a giant employment-generation
mechanism. The laziness of its rich, the uselessness in housework of
pampered men retarded by their mothers, the failed provinces that churn
out millions of cheap labourers, the social pettiness of the lucky who
require the reassurance of being feudal lords to other humans, the
foolishness of nominal security, the inefficiencies, incompetence and
disrespect for the time of the poor have created millions of jobs that
provide livelihood to hundreds of millions who are otherwise not
required.

The most maligned Indian flaw, that of our society deeming some jobs fit
only for the low castes, too, provides employment. Not just that, it
also gives the poor a monopoly over some professions. For instance, in
skinning dead cattle, Dalits do not face competition from more
influential communities that could have otherwise stolen their
livelihood. Some intellectuals claim that Dalits are “entrapped” by such
professions. The Dalits themselves do not see their circumstances this
way. The fact is that the castes that intellectuals hail from dictate
their professions in a more inescapable way. Isn’t a Brahmin, after all,
fated to be in software, surgery, finance and academics? The elite of
India is entrapped in a sophisticated version of cow-skinning.

Such these jobs of the highly educated and the rich do not necessarily
have more meaning than other jobs. In fact, many things that the poor
are forced to do for employment have greater meaning than many
“white-collar” jobs.

What do some “big people” do? Serious men go in cars thinking of ways to
make people drink sugared water, or buy a type of useless insurance, or
a condom that has dots on it, or to merely gamble with other people’s
money. Some even write columns about how most jobs have no meaning.

There was a time when scholars thought that the unproductive poor Indian
was a serious problem. Even now, there are scholars who think that, but
it is because they are not scholarly enough. I sense a diminishing scorn
for superfluous lowly jobs because most reputable jobs themselves are
under threat from computers.

Tech billionaires are telling us that most highly educated people will
become “useless” in the future. That would include most analysts,
bankers, doctors, lawyers, journalists and even code writers. Already,
in India, it is easier for talented carpenters to find work than it is
for a small-town postgraduate in arts who was fooled into higher
education.

In the future, these billionaires convey, only a small elite will be
required to run the world. But I know that people will ensure that such
an efficient world will not come to be. Such an automated world will
have no meaning, unless there is war. What will machines produce if not
many humans can buy those goods?

India, through all its flaws, has always demonstrated that employment is
not only about efficiency, requirement and common sense but also about
crowding our times with other humans who deserve the reasonable joys of
purpose and feeling useful.
