# What Savarkar could yet do for the future of Hindutva

*2019-08-25*

On behalf of my boyhood, I thank the Indian National Congress and its
intellectual franchisees for erasing many chapters from history
textbooks, which were already dreary. One of the chapters was Vinayak
Savarkar, who invented Hindutva about a hundred years ago. I wish the
screw gauge and vernier callipers, too, had been involved in Hindutva.

The erasure of Savarkar by intellectuals 1.0 was so complete that at the
end of it all he was not even a villain. He was not mentioned in
textbooks even as one of the accused in the assassination of Mahatma
Gandhi.

Over the decades, Savarkar’s rehabilitation was attempted by his
admirers and those who needed a hero outside the Nehruvian Avengers
series. Actually, he was the sort of man who needed to be rehabilitated
when he was still alive, and it was tried. But his resurrection has
succeeded only recently, since the rise of another man, Narendra Modi.

This month, two absorbing and distinct biographies of Savarkar were
released: *The True Story Of The Father Of Hindutva* by Vaibhav
Purandare and *Echoes From A Forgotten Past, 1883-1924* by Vikram
Sampath.

It is impossible to tell the story of Savarkar without laughing at
India’s most loved nonsense: that India won its independence from the
British because of “non-violent” walkathons led by one man. There was,
of course, always the other view: that India was freed by armed rebels,
or “extremists”, many of whom were tortured and killed by the British.
Both sides are exaggerations that do not consider the outsized role of
Britain’s destruction in the world wars.

What the two books establish, though, is that the invention of Hindu
nationalism gave the freedom movement a menacing heft. Several men
before Savarkar attempted to consolidate Hinduism, and even reform it.
But they were religious men and so they were blind to something
important. Hinduism was not built on magic. Savarkar was an atheist, and
his insight was that Hinduism was a powerful political identity that
does not require gods, or even the cow actually, whom he did not love
very much, and that Hinduism is a fundamental genetic force in all
Indians. In this way, he invented Hindutva.

What is the future of Hindutva? Are people who believe in Hindutva good
people? In the first place, was the man who invented Hindutva a good
man?

The canonization of Savarkar points to the extraordinary health of the
Vatican that controls contemporary Hindutva. It is important to note
that rehabilitation does not mean something charlatan. For instance,
vast tracts of the two mentioned biographies are convincing. They easily
demolish the foolish argument that Savarkar was a coward. Yes, he wrote
letters begging to be released from the horrific Cellular Jail in the
Andamans, but that was only smart. A man who does not know fear is
insane. A man who knows fear and still puts himself in a position where
his darkest fears may come true, is probably very brave.

But was Savarkar a good man?

Purandare does not hide Savarkar’s professed hatred for Muslims. In his
early years as a revolutionary, Savarkar asked Hindus and Muslims to get
along, but eventually he wished to subdue Muslims. In trying to explain
the shift, Purandare makes an important connection. Several Muslims
manned the Cellular Jail, and they appeared to have harmed Savarkar.

Intellectuals tend to give fancy reasons for why some men hate some
things, but the truth is often simple. It is personal. Savarkar’s own
experience of Muslims made him a passionate transmitter of the idea of
Hindutva to others who had such experiences, and today it attracts even
those who have never had a bad moment with Muslims. It derives its power
from the same quality that makes “the right-wing” itself powerful
worldwide: relevance.

Most famous ideas are noble, but there is no correlation between
nobility and relevance. Hindutva is grey. It is not constricted by
unnatural moralities, hence, has exceptional freedoms to get things
done.

But it cannot survive in India for too long in opposition to other
faiths. Hindutva has to become an unambiguously moral force, like other
grey ideas did. And it will constantly push its syndicate to find sly
but moral ways to protect Hindus. What do you think India’s latest push
for population control is about?

I have a theory that Baba Ramdev’s tongue foreruns some of Modi’s
policies. Don’t forget Ramdev was the first to speak of banning large
currency notes. A few weeks ago, he mentioned population control. Days
later, on 15 August, Modi spoke about the matter, even though in many
states the Indian population is plateauing. In general, when people
speak of population control, they do not necessarily mean the reduction
of human births, but of particular sections of them. Any strong
population policy would address a wide Hindu concern that Muslims are
growing at a faster rate than Hindus.

Savarkar can help Hindutva in its transformation into a moral force for
current times. For instance, he hated the worship of cows. He even
suggested that Hindus eat beef, if their survival depended on it.

Purandare and Sampath portray the inventor of Hindutva as a flawed man,
but also a man who was scientific, moral, sly in a self-preservative
way, and physically fit. Not such a bad icon, if some of his angry
tweets can be erased, just as Gandhi’s view of African Blacks as
inferior humans was erased.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
