# All governments are at war with their own people

*2019-11-03*

As the identities of Indian activists who may have been spied upon by a
shadowy agency slowly emerge, the matter has become the human rights
industry’s equivalent of the Bachchan Diwali party: If you are on the
list, your friends will think you have arrived big time, but then it is
not clear why some A-listers are not on the list.

Facebook, which owns WhatsApp, has sued an Israeli company, called NSO
Group, for selling a highly sophisticated spyware system, called
Pegasus, to government agencies across the world that have, in turn,
used it to breach phones of over a thousand people, including Indians.
The malware lured the target to click on a link, which is typical of
such attempts to break in, but it was also so advanced that it could
gain access by sending a WhatsApp call even if it was not answered. The
spyware could then collect all data from the device, including
passwords, and control camera and audio settings.

All this is what we know, which means it is a fraction of what has
transpired.

Some Indian activists have claimed that they were among the targets of
Pegasus. At the time of filing this column, the Indian media have
identified 17 targets and described them as “human rights activists,
scholars and journalists”, which are ambiguous terms today, but
descriptive of a type of people who are politicians but do not contest
elections. Almost all of them fight the Indian government on behalf of
the unfortunate.

The NSO Group has defended its spyware by saying that it has sold
Pegasus only to “legitimate” government agencies. This statement appears
to have implicated the Indian government in some way. Which other
government, humanitarians ask, would be so interested in Indian
activists?

As though in anticipation of this very moment, India has in place a
minister who oversees law, justice, communications, electronics and
information technology—Ravi Shankar Prasad, who has denied the
accusation of government-grade spying with the observation: “…India is
committed to protecting privacy of all Indian citizens.”

Governments usually do not deny that they snoop on their own people.
They, in fact, claim that they do it legally. But then, many things that
the government does are legal precisely because it’s the government
that’s doing it, unless some people have been clumsy with the paperwork.
The most famous incorrect statement in history has to be Hegel’s: “The
State is the actuality of the ethical idea.” The State is, in fact,
actually the fabricator of the ethical idea.

Every government claims that it spies on its own people for the ultimate
moral reason: to protect them. Even Obama defended large-scale and
sophisticated snooping on Americans when he was US president. He also
said his people would have been better off if they had not come to know
about the spying.

Activists ask if the Indian government is in a state of war against its
citizens. It’s meant to be a rhetorical question, a familiar rebuke. But
it has an answer, and that is “yes”. All governments are at war with
their people. This holds even in nations where they get to vote.

The State needs the money of its people, their surrender to laws and
their acceptance of a limited set of freedoms, widely overrated as
“liberty”. And, the State needs to know, in the most efficient ways
possible, what is going on. Also, the State is in a perpetual war
against disenchanted groups that do not have the funds to contest
elections, so conduct a soft war through humanitarianism,
environmentalism, and other ambushes that masquerade as journalism. The
typical government is filled with successful people, who need to know
what their vanquished rivals were plotting.

As technology advances, governments become increasingly sophisticated
snoopers. They officially snoop at many levels.

Over a decade ago, when a chain of mysterious sources handed over a set
of recordings of phone conversations of a woman called Niira Radia to
the media, no one knew which wing of the government had made the
recordings. Only after some of the recordings were made public did we
know that they were conducted by the finance ministry after an
“anonymous” letter (which the ministry, mysteriously, took very
seriously) drew its attention to Radia.

It is possible that even at the level of domestic crimes, the police do
not solve tough cases only by going to shamans, as some of them are
known to do. A more efficient way is the illegal tapping of phones to
collect information that can never be presented as evidence in court,
but points to the truth, which the investigators then reverse-engineer
to arrive at evidence.

The NSO Group, too, claims that it is essentially in a moral business,
that it helps governments disarm terrorists and drug cartels. In fact,
NSO has a human rights policy, which is chiefly a nonsensical statement
that includes words like “guiding principles” and how it does not sell
to governments with a bad human rights record (yet it sold Pegasus to
Saudi Arabia). It is inevitable that journalists will have two
interesting questions for the organization: “Did you sell your tech to
India” and “If so, when?”

The activists whose phones the spyware breached also seem to be the type
of people who fear Aadhaar, which is in comparison an innocuous assembly
of already surrendered information. I cannot help thinking that the
activists may have berated Aadhaar on their phones to their like-minded
friends, and how much the snoop who heard this would have laughed.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
