# Is being boorish an important Indian characteristic?

*2019-07-31*

Indians can switch to the acting mode very fast. Something about the
Indian way of life requires hamming. Showing respect for elders and
offering to pay restaurant bills are almost folk dances. Often a whole
family is the cast, walking out to the stage with no rehearsal. This
many of us saw a few days ago in a viral video that showed an Indian
family in a Bali resort. They had been caught by the hotel staff trying
to make off with various objects from their room.

The head of the family acts surprised. He asks his folks why they had to
steal these trivial things when he could buy them stuff worth “50
lakhs”. His wife keeps asking him “to pay up”. One family member tries
to touch the feet of a hotel staffer—but it is only an intent, with his
hand reaching for the crotch instead of the feet. They had behaved very
differently before they were caught. As a member of the hotel staff says
towards the end: “You were yelling at us, now you are cooling down. Why
were you yelling?”

Indians who watched this video on social media were disgusted. Not at
what the Indian family had done, but more likely at the fact that they
had got caught. Already, Indians are among the most despised tourists in
the world. Recently Hotel Arc-En-Ciel in the Swiss town of Gstaad put
out a notice for their “Dear guests from India”, in which the hotel
asked them not to be too loud in common areas, or behave in a cheap
manner to save money on food, or make a mess at the breakfast buffet.

Indians were in such a mood to self-flagellate this week that most of
them, it appeared, were more ashamed than offended. They had good
reasons, though, to be offended. A racist view need not be entirely
incorrect about a race or nationality, yet it is unintelligent because
the potential to be wrong about some Indians does not justify being
right about most Indians. Yet, we also know that if the hotel had not
insulted its Indian guests in this manner, it would not have got the
message across.

An Indian in a first world nation is tame when he is alone. But when he
is in the company of friends and family, he becomes emboldened. He is
mostly scared of White waiters and flight crew, but is confident to boss
around Asians and Africans.

I believe that the primary problem of Indians, especially those who have
not been co-opted into the global cultural orphanage, who are instead
culturally rooted, is with the idea of order. In India, they observe a
social order, like caste norms, but require civic chaos to feel human.
They suffer in rich nations because after their early days of
enchantment, they grow tired of the civic order, the hold of a
straight-line civilization, the confusion of a social order where even
men on a garbage truck have so much swag.

Coming from a nation where at any given moment someone is high and
someone is low, an Indian seeks the reassurance of social rank in bad
behaviour—in shouting at people, and playing loud music and trashing a
place.

Something about being considerate is mistaken for humility in India and
something about true humility is mistaken for defeat. Humility, for most
Indians, is what they do when they are hamming. In fact, Indians “feel
humbled” only when they are about to brag about something good that has
happened to them.

The global Indian lout emerges from the domestic Indian lout. India puts
up with atrocious behaviour. Indians who are concerned about the
nation’s global image need to start at home. My friend who runs a hotel
in Manali told me that as Indians become more prosperous, there appears
to be an endless procession of guests who know that if they find a good
problem, they will get a full refund. They are empowered by the new
democracy unleashed by travel websites, which allows them to harm hotels
by rating them.

There are, of course, far worse louts than Indians. British and
American, for instance, who do not need to be among others of their
tribe to behave poorly, who are culturally and racially confident enough
to do whatever they wish. At least Indians fear that if they get into
trouble in foreign nations, their embassy will be totally useless. But
the most annoying modern Caucasian lout is the sanctimonious hipster who
infests ecologically fragile places and tries to admonish others,
especially Asians, on how they must conduct themselves. About two years
ago, Condé Nast magazine sent me to Antarctica and I never missed a
chance to be entertained by an American who somehow thought Asians were
more likely to step on penguins. Eventually, I watched in satisfaction
as a fur seal chased him on a beach.

On that cruise, I enjoyed the company of Indians who were festive,
cheerful, informed and danced the best. In places where we are allowed
to make a noise, our rustic informality radiates a certain incomparable
human warmth.

In our fear of brown boorishness, we must not end up entirely imitating
the Western reserve. Like the Japanese, who have become perplexing even
to themselves.

I had my own experience as a boorish Indian in Japan when on a bullet
train I joined a dozen Indians in laughing aloud at a joke. A Japanese
passenger told our handler: “Teach these Indians some Japanese manners.”

For the rest of the journey we were quiet and elegant. Being refined,
after all, is method acting.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.*
