# A theory about the sudden rise of Nitin Gadkari

*2019-04-01*

I believe that there are only four kinds of people: the philosopher, the
fan, the actor and the builder.

The philosopher is under the spell of intuition that makes him or her
see clearly through the smog of scholarship. Intuition is not a mystical
force. It emerges from subterranean knowledge but does not require
excessive information. The primary quality of intuition is that it is
truth, or an opinion, that precedes substantiation. Philosophers are
usually found in mathematics, science and literature, but very rarely
among people who are known as philosophers.

The actor is a person who can project a myth and in whom others can see
what they wish to see. He is the art whose true nature is that he is its
canvass. He is also an onion. The peels are the substance. Examples of
the actor are successful mass politicians, top salaried managers of a
corporation, many writers, some people in the organized compassion
business and singers.

At this point I wish to reassure you that this column is about Nitin
Gadkari, who is a beloved of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (RSS), and
the central minister for road transport and highways, shipping and water
resources, river development and Ganga rejuvenation, a man who has been
enjoying a sudden and mysterious rise in political stature these past
few weeks.

However, I have to first tell you about the fan. The fan is the
receiver, patron, consumer, conformist and the most efficient
transmitter of all human achievements and delusions. Struck by the
greatness of some philosophers, actors and builders, the fan imitates
them and becomes an imposter.

Now we come to Gadkari who is an example of the builder. A builder is
consumed by the idea of creating giant objects, grand things. The true
modern builder shares some traits with ancient builders across all
cultures. Building grand beautiful things is expensive, so they have to
invent good reasons to build, which they find in two powerful stories
that might even be true. One is that building is good business and the
other is that building is moral.

For many years, Gadkari has been a builder who claimed moral reasons to
perform his art—the public good. He was popular in Nagpur, but beyond
that, he was never a mass leader who could influence elections. He was,
as journalist Rajdeep Sardesai told him in March, “an Upper House
leader”. But now something is changing. A huge cut-out is being crafted
by an unseen force that is presenting him as a man who has built great
expressways and ports, and who will transform the infrastructure of the
nation.

In the past few weeks, he has allowed and been granted considerable
attention by the media, to the extent that in the perception of the
urban middle-class, he is the second most noticeable leader of the
Bharatiya Janata Party, just below Narendra Modi but above Amit Shah.
Political journalists have promoted the idea that the RSS is readying
Gadkari in the eventuality that the party does not win a majority and
needs to woo new allies. Then this agreeable man will be presented as
the prime ministerial candidate instead of Modi.

How did a builder become more agreeable than an actor? The manner in
which Gadkari has presented himself in recent weeks is significant for
the fact that he spoke like a builder. For long in Indian politics,
actors have won elections and builders have quietly got things done.
However, it now appears that Gadkari knows the time has come for the
builder. Indians are finally willing to accept the morality of building.

Of late, this is what Gadkari has said on various platforms: That
Priyanka Gandhi could sail on the Ganga and drink the sacred river’s
water because he cleaned it and that very soon, Indians will be able to
travel from Delhi to Bangladesh on a network of rivers. That the whole
nation should have only concrete roads and that he is at the helm of so
much infrastructural work that 40% of the cement produced by the nation
is consumed by his ministries. That corporate defaulters are not always
frauds and that a salaried man will never understand the pressures of
business. That when we build, we must think a hundred years ahead. That
he has commissioned work worth “ <span class="webrupee">₹</span>16 lakh
crores”, yet no contractor had to visit his office, and that he is a
straight-talking man who once told “a million Muslims” that he would
like to have their votes but they should know that he is essentially a
“chaddiwala”.

He appeared in several forums this month as he usually appears, in shirt
and trousers, underrated modern political garments, which are emerging
as a sign of either honesty or efficiency. He spoke with a command over
detail that politicians usually don’t demonstrate: “1kg of CNG is equal
to 1.3 litres of diesel”; “if you harvest human waste you can separate
methane, which can be used to make biofuel”.

He also conveyed that as a builder, he plays politics only during
election time and that he has an excellent relationship with a spectrum
of politicians, including Arvind Kejriwal. There are images of the two
getting along fine, both in shirts of the same size.

The favourable public perception of Gadkari in Modi’s bastions points to
some simple facts: Most Indians, even in big metros, are villagers when
it comes to infrastructure and they are in awe of giant swanky projects.
Also, as a nation progresses, it is not only the actor who can win
elections. Even the builder can.

The ultimate goal of democracy, though, is to make the philosopher win.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.*
