# Art can teach entrepreneurs how to deal with shame

*2019-08-05*

The saints of prey love a good suicide. They feed on it by assigning
their own malady of interest as the cause of death. Dalit—oppression;
Brahmin engineering student—academic pressure; farmer—debt and
capitalism; Assamese—the National Register of Citizens. A rich Indian
upper-caste middle-aged male is among the few who are allowed to kill
themselves out of clinical depression. But the suicide of V.G.
Siddhartha, the founder of Café Coffee Day, reminded us of some national
maladies.

The police plan to interpret a letter he is believed to have dictated to
a secretary as his “dying declaration”. If you wish to believe
mainstream scientific opinion that a suicide is too complex to be
attributed to a single cause, and that it is primarily a consequence of
mental health, a suicide note will emerge as disproportionately
overvalued in arriving at the “cause” of a death. Still, what people
choose to mention in their final moments always has great value to us
all. He wrote: “My intention was never to cheat or mislead anybody, I
have failed as an entrepreneur.”

He probably knew that Indians have little sympathy for rich men who
fail—if they are alive. As news of his death spread, people paid him
tributes on social media, which included recounting their happy memories
in his cafés. If he had chosen to live, and had fled the country to
evade taxes and other financial obligations, the same mourners would
have abused him. A wealthy man has to drown, lie as corpse on sand as a
spectacle for television cameras, to be allowed some consideration.

Reacting to the death, billionaire Anand Mahindra said: “…entrepreneurs
must not allow business failure to destroy their self-esteem.”

But is this possible? If self-esteem is a fabrication of success and
luck, why must not failure and tough luck destroy it? How then must we
deal with failure? Maybe there are some things that entrepreneurs can
learn from artists even though there is much that they should
disrespect.

If you look around, almost everyone is a failure; almost everyone is in
some stage of failure. Most people do badly. It is from this that
success derives its very meaning. The worth of success is in the norm of
failure. Yet, people are ashamed of failure. And they flock to that
spurious industry called motivational talks, which is based on the lie
that there is a clear path to success. What the speakers never mention
are three facts—the element of luck in their lives, which includes
family wealth and social equity that makes all other causes irrelevant;
their secret capacity for corrupt behaviour; and the contribution of
their mental anomalies, like capacity for sociopathic behaviour, that
has great professional advantages but cannot be replicated.

Very often these days, I meet men in their forties who had high
corporate positions but were forced by office politics, or boredom, or
the lure of a fad, to become entrepreneurs. And, as they get nowhere,
they swing between wise bitterness and hope, which is chiefly a
conversation with oneself and a premonition of defeat. They are a lot
like many writers and filmmakers who need a break. But, unlike in the
arts, in business most metrics of success are easy to measure.
Entrepreneurs cannot hide in subjectivity or morality or in non-profits.

Artists can find acclaim that is disproportionate to the success of
their creation if they have the right friends or the right political
wound. Also, artists can promote failure itself as proof of their
talent. And, they are rewarded for expressing their weakness, sorrows
and even mental ailments. Entrepreneurs, on the other hand, have to
exude joy, sanity, clarity and hope. As a result, they have fewer places
to hide. So what is it that entrepreneurs can learn from artists?

We assume that an entrepreneur is driven by practicality, compromise and
consensus in his goal to achieve a material end, while an artist will
not appease anyone and is willing to undergo great hardships to win his
freedom to do as he or she likes. I have no quarrels with these
assumptions, except that the pure entrepreneur and the pure artist do
not exist. There is a merchant and an artist combined in all of us.
Artists see this more clearly than entrepreneurs and that is their
secret. Most artists, even honest talented artists, do make very
practical and even commercial decisions.

Entrepreneurs, too, must find the artist in them. The best among them
do. They invoke the artist in them when they rate poverty above
compromise and values above consensus and quality above profits. A few
days ago, a Hindu customer of Zomato refused to accept a Muslim rider,
but the company did not relent. Deepinder Goyal, the company’s
co-founder, tweeted: “We aren’t sorry to lose any business that comes in
the way of our values.”

Very often in business practicality is overrated and integrity is
underrated. What good artists know is that integrity is not the moral
high stand of charlatans; rather, integrity is a form of logic—integrity
tells you that in a situation there is only one way of doing something
right; and practicality gives you a million ways to do something wrong.

From the logic of artistic integrity entrepreneurs too can derive joy,
and the humour not to revere humanity so much that mere failure is a
trauma, and the power not to be shamed until we grant the world the
right to shame us.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
