# No men were harmed in the making of the Kondo legend

*2019-02-10*

It is inevitable: Marie Kondo will come home. She struck mine early. One
evening, many months before she became the Netflix sensation that she
has become today, I came home to find piles of garments belonging to my
wife. “You have so much stuff,” I blurted out.

On any other day such an unwise comment would lead to an attempt to
reform me once again into a man who owned shirts of various colours and
material, and shoes for various occasions. After all, it is true that
when I was 24, I was sent away from a press event because I was poorly
dressed. Yet, I have improved only enough to be admitted into rooms.

However, that evening, my wife meekly accepted that I was right: she had
too many things, too many clothes, too many shoes, too many objects
whose names I didn’t know. She had been reading Kondo. I like Kondo.

What Kondo says is that the past is a clutter; thank clutter, and throw
most of it out except that which will make you feel “as if the cells in
your body are slowly rising”. On the Netflix show she says this with a
spring and a yelp. She is actually talking to your wife, not you.

It is odd how the media postures that Kondo is someone who is important
to both women and men. That is because it is respectable to convey the
notion that tidying up is a responsibility of both men and women.

However, the fact is that the legend of Kondo is almost entirely a
creation of deep female interest in her.

So here is what men should know about Kondo and about other things that
will help you understand Kondo.

1\. A revolutionary usually has a disorder, or a gift, or a capacity or
a mental state to perform an action that can cause a revolution when
many people who do not have the disorder or the gift or the capacity or
the mental state try to imitate the revolutionary. The normal trying to
imitate the abnormal—that is why the world is in a tumult. However, this
is also what gives meaning to life.

Kondo is tumult and meaning. She is transmitting the most incorrect but
powerful message that a gifted person can convey: “What I am is
attainable to you.” Millions of women are trying to imitate her methods
in their homes, which inevitably means they are drafting their husbands
to be a part of the process.

2\. If Kondo has come to your house, it means your marriage is good.

The Netflix show begins with a weeping woman and images of her husband’s
fingers, which in documentary parlance means “tension”. However, Kondo
is in reality about hope and the persistence of happiness.

The influence of Kondo will coerce you to fling your clothes in a heap
in the middle of the room, hold an old T-shirt and ask yourself if the
cells in your body are “slowly rising”. You will be coerced into tidying
up a kitchen that you may think is actually tidy. However, all this is a
sign of a healthy home. As Marx told us without telling us, the conflict
is the whole point. Resolution is a plot device invented by bearded
writers to end a book.

But remember Kondo, too, lies: “There will always be an end to tidying.”

3\. Some of you may feel that after the abduction and disappearance of
your cargo shorts, or the insults conveyed to you for wearing the most
comfortable garment ever made, Kondo is the most powerful reminder of
the fact that peace is a feminine world where there are rules and floral
things and cups with small useless ears.

But Kondo is not unbeatable.

She makes two crucial mistakes. One is with books. In the first episode
of the Netflix show, she shakes books to “wake them up”. She appliesher
general rule to books:If they don’t spark joy throw them away, dooming
many read books and most unread books.

This gives you the opportunity to bring the writer and mathematician
Nassim Nicholas Taleb to the fight.

“Read books are far less valuable than unread ones,” he wrote in his
widely read book, *Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable*. A
good library is not a demonstration of how much we know but an
“anti-library” that is an exhibition of what we do not know yet.

In the homes of genuine readers of books, it is unlikely that Kondo will
prevail.

4\. Also, she allows for sentimentality, which some people know means
you get to keep all your junk. Kondo lets you keep useless things as
long as they mean something to you, which invariably means things from
the past. But then every single object from your present will be
sentimental many decades later. This argument will let you keep almost
anything you want if you have already demonstrated signs of
sentimentality.

5\. Kondo is not a rebuke of consumerism. She only shows the most wise
form of materialism—austerity. Own great things, expensive things, but
few things.

6\. And if you wonder how the male version of Kondo would look like, I
recommend another Netflix show: *Queer Eye*, in which a slob does not
need to become a better person; he needs to just step out of his house,
shop, allow himself to be groomed and drink, as five amiable gay men
transform his home into something sex-worthy.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist and novelist, most recent of ‘Miss Laila,
Armed And Dangerous’*
