# Are the intellectual benefits of reading overrated?

*2019-11-17*

A few days ago, a girl rose from a large audience and asked Shashi
Tharoor to give “a new word for us to learn”, as he was “a man of
vocabulary”. Tharoor, as he sipped elegantly from a tea cup, said: “I
will give you a very simple and old word—‘read’.” Even though he
mentioned reading as a way of improving one’s vocabulary, no one was
left in any doubt that he was emphasizing one of our most sacred
beliefs—that reading makes you intelligent, that the act of reading
itself is a form of intelligence, and that reading is the most superior
way to absorb knowledge. Through reading, he “developed the kind of mind
that God has now blessed me with… so my only advice to all of you is
read, read, read…” There was applause. Ordinary people rewarded his
message through their greatest tribute—it went “viral”.

His is not only a common view, but has the finality of a settled, common
truth. As a result, a vast number of people live in private shame. They
are not readers. They find books boring. They may read out of
professional or academic compulsion and, on occasion, they may read an
article that might be useful, which has “a takeaway”, but generally they
cannot bear to read long articles; they will struggle to reach the end
of this short column, even though I am trying to trick them right now
into believing it is all about them.

There are others who are actually interested in reading, but they cannot
focus; their minds are too active for the stillness that reading
requires.

Among the vast millions of non-readers are highly successful
people—industrialists, and CEOs and surgeons and techies and actors and
even directors. Actually, even writers. One of the great secrets of our
age is that most educated people in the world do not wish to read or
cannot read well. Many of them are intelligent, just as many well-read
people are not very intelligent.

Reading appears to have the qualities of an ability and, in this light,
a vast number of people in the world might have a reading disability. On
occasion, I see non-readers, long oppressed by ceaseless tributes to
reading, cursing the state of affairs and declaring that reading is not
everything, that there are other valuable forms of acquiring knowledge.
But generally, people do not have the courage to say this because they
fear they will be perceived by others as not only uninformed, but also
unintelligent. Most of them, even though they do not enjoy reading,
force themselves to read a book as a form of self-improvement. You can
see them in public spaces, peering into a book for a few seconds, then
looking up at the slightest distraction. You can see them on a flight
almost never turning a page; their minds have wandered away to more
beautiful places.

Actually, even readers of one genre demonstrate a reading disability
when faced with books from other genres. Men who enjoy thousands of
pages of dense military history lose their ascetic powers of
concentration when they are forced (by love) to read a literary novel.
People who enjoy Jane Austen may read a popular history of calculus
exactly at the speed, and the level of comprehension and retention, of a
semi-literate.

Even within the area of a reader’s interest, he might find it hard to
focus.

The literary deity, Gabriel García Márquez, struggled for several years
to read a celebrated novel whose first five pages generations of readers
have struggled to get past —Ulysses by James Joyce. But, like many of
us, García Márquez thought something was wrong with him and not the
book. Later, “as a docile adult”, he managed to complete the book.
“Docile” is an important expression. The young who are gifted with good
minds may not have the docility to read. All through my early youth, the
best-read boys were terrible writers; they still are. They filled their
vacant heads with the works of other people because their own minds
produced nothing.

Beneficiaries of reading, like writers, and people who are good sponges
of the intelligence of others, are unsurprisingly the evangelists of
reading. But what every seasoned reader knows is that a good book is
rare to come by. In that way, a book is no more sacred than other human
creations.

Kindle’s indicators of mass reader-behaviour point to the fact that most
celebrated books are abandoned very early—like A Brief History Of Time
by Stephen Hawking, and Capital In The Twenty-First Century by Thomas
Piketty. And that list of “transformative” books you posted on social
media is mostly a lie.

Books might be over-venerated, but is it the same as saying that reading
is overrated? Is reading a “good” book superior to watching a good film
or a good documentary? There is a widespread notion that reading results
in a deeper retention of what is absorbed. But there is no evidence to
support this view. From what I have seen, retention itself is an
ability. People who retain a lot from reading also demonstrate higher
levels of retention from watching a documentary or a film. And many good
readers retain very little of what they have read, just as they retain
very little of what they watch.

Some people absorb knowledge better from sounds and visuals; and others
better from calm reading. The exalted place of reading can be traced to
the fact that it is the oldest technique of accumulating vast amounts of
information, and to the fact that writers, who have an outsized
influence on the world, have promoted a wish as a truth.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
