# Why there exists no such thing as a global right wing

*2019-10-04*

In the British comedy Fleabag, a young woman is aroused by watching
Barack Obama give a speech about democracy. The universality of the
moment is in the fact that she could have been anywhere in the world and
we could infer she believes in climate change and the liberation of
Palestine.

Far less mesmerizing men than Obama have been global heroes—like Hugo
Chávez, who was once treated like a rock star at Jawaharlal Nehru
University. But all such public figures of various nationalities have
one thing in common—they are humanitarians.

Strongmen, on the other hand, are usually local heroes, and if the world
outside cares about them at all, it is usually as villains.

There appears to be much in common between “right wing” heroes of
various nations, but they are never in alliance, like humanitarians can
be.

Is there a global fellowship of strongmen who exchange jokes about
Obama, Macron and Marx, and about the latest lament in The Guardian on
“the rise of strongmen across the world”? Is there an intellectual
festival for patriots from different nations where a Brahmin, a White
and an Arab will argue why their groups are superior, what a nuisance
poor migrants are, and how cultural diversity is just a device to get
cheap waiters?

These concepts don’t exist, but not because people don’t think along
these lines. They do. It is the “global” aspect of such a congregation
that seems ridiculous. There is something odd about the idea of a
“global nationalist”.

By nature, the “left wing” is global and the “right wing” is local. Of
late, new Indian patriots have been trying to change this; they have
been trying to form global alliances with conservatives in advanced
economies. After all, the Indian patriot today is more suave than his
earlier avatar. New nationalists are culturally and linguistically
comprehensible to the West, and they are successful people in
respectable professions.

But the global right is a futile exercise. There will never be such a
thing.

After the Narendra Modi government integrated Kashmir with India beyond
any ambiguity, the modern Indian patriot imagined US President Donald
Trump would cheer. As though it was natural that Trump and Modi should
get along because the same newspapers are critical of their leadership.
Patriots even imagined that a global network of strongmen will support
the nationalistic mojo of the move. But supporting Modi on Kashmir was
clearly not the priority of “conservatives” across the world. Even so,
The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Guardian, the BBC and
Western liberal intellectuals who knew very little about India’s
northern-most state magically acquired enough wisdom to bemoan the
“suspension of freedom” and “the violation of human rights” and “the
suffering” of Kashmiris.

Meanwhile, Fox News and The Sun did not magically acquire any right wing
wisdom—that the poor of Kashmir have been liberated from their crooked
elite, trauma merchants, terrorist middlemen and economic stagnation.

The “left” is a low-stakes human hive of hearts on auto-pilot that sees
the world as a human hive of victims. The “right” is a high-stakes
pre-occupation with what is locally relevant. The “left” is a
monoculture of a European idea; the “right” is culture. All elites are
like parents—conservative at home, where the stakes are high, and
liberal elsewhere, an abstract place that is not as important as home.

It is not only the social right that is helplessly local.

Increasingly, the economic right, too, is shedding its evangelism of
globalization as it does not serve its interests anymore. Last year,
Trump told the United Nations, “We reject the ideology of globalism and
we embrace the doctrine of patriotism.”

There are, of course, a few global right-wing figures. Hitler, for
instance, has for long been a mascot for groups that wish to terminate
cultural diversity in society. Russia’s Vladimir Putin has fans who post
videos of his motorcade, of his walks down corridors in slow motion, and
of his bare-chested horse rides. But these fans are a small fringe
compared to the numbers, spread and diversity of the fans of
humanitarian figures.

There are powerful reasons why there is no such thing as the global
right. Any wound that is global will automatically become a left
movement.

Even a strand of the Indian freedom movement that was led by the first
generation of Hindu nationalists who did not seem to believe in ideas
like non-violence, found support in Britain only from the left,
including the early feminist movement which saw in the plight of Indians
the plight of all British women. On the other hand, it was natural for
British nationalists to despise Indian freedom fighters. This principle
operates today in every right-wing struggle.

Nationalists of a society tend to perceive other nationalists as foes.
And nationalists themselves often become liberals once they migrate—as
is the case with many Indian patriots who live in the US.

Also, everyone, including nationalists, has a quota of compassion that
they need to display. And it is easy for them to show compassion to
victims outside their borders. For instance, it is easy for Trump
supporters to sympathize with Kashmiris. It is easy empathy, very sweet,
and does not affect their own lives.

When the stakes are low, everyone is a leftist.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.*
