# A farce called objectivity is dead, and that’s great

*2019-02-17*

Some of you may be surprised to know that despite all the noise
surrounding the Rafale aircraft, there is not a shred of evidence yet
that its purchase is a financial scam. If this corroborates your
conviction and a current of well-being has run through your body, you
are on the side of Narendra Modi. If it irritates you, and your mind is
searching for a clinching and futile rebuttal, then you are a person who
wishes Modi to fail in the general elections. Journalists, too, are such
simple people who belong to either of the two distinct camps, but they
feel they must pretend to be “neutral”, which is a meaningless word to
describe any human state.

Elsewhere, Donald Trump has exposed US intellectuals and the most
hallowed brands of American journalism, like The New York Times, as
being incapable of objectivity when things don’t go their way. They had
consistently underestimated his popularity when he was running for
president, and have since reported on his presidency with venom. Also,
they have, with no substantive evidence, portrayed the power of Facebook
as the reason why they could not exert any moral influence on the
American voter.

We live in an age where regular people have come to believe that there
is no objectivity anymore in journalism, literature, philosophy, formal
conversations and in any medium that is supposed to transmit truth.
Noble preachers who lament ‘echo chambers’ themselves are in echo
chambers. At the same time, everyone who has something to say is working
very hard to appear “objective”. Even as people increasingly find it
hard to be “neutral”, they expect that everyone else is “objective”
which is nothing more than a demand that you agree with them.

Objectivity is a farce. The expectation that a human being will report
or analyze any event without being influenced by emotion is so
ridiculous an idea that it is surprising the myth survived so long.

The word “observation”, which writers have invented to describe their
skill, is comically pompous when you realize that writers actually do
believe that an observation is an act of seeing. Many simpleton writers
take this lie too far. About 10 years ago, the author of the novel
Shantaram, Gregory David Roberts, in the newness of fame and the
disorientation of being feted as a fine “observer” of people, told me
that he goes to Mumbai’s Leopold restaurant and sits for hours
“observing” people.

But observation is not the act of seeing. It is the corrupt memory of
seeing.

What humans have always demonstrated is that most of them have no
capacity to be objective, especially in affairs that truly affect them.
The objective, in reality, are a rare personality type, like the
flexible and the endurance runner.

Formal objectivity, as an exalted intellectual virtue, appears to be an
ancient invention, a powerful decorum and a wise trick in communication
that is meant to convey to the consumer of information that an
observation has credibility. Until recent times, the respectable world
of scholars and writers did appear objective, but that was because they
had extraordinary powers to establish their prejudice as “objective
reality”.

Today the democratization of voice has exposed intellectuals as people
who are as biased as anyone else, but in journalism and academia, they
still hold on to the farce of objectivity through some obsolete ruses.

The most common procedure is called “balance”. In that lame trick, you
carry opposing voices of equal lengths in your report while all along
believing in one view and eventually nudge the reader into trusting that
view.

Objectivity is also achieved through ‘over-compensation’. You could see
this phenomenon a few days ago in the aftermath of the terror attack in
Kashmir. Liberals, who are usually attacked by nationalists for loving
the idea of Islam more than the idea of India, made a special effort to
issue strong condemnations of the attack. There was a time when only
heads of state used to issue cliched statements of condemnation and
condolence. Now intellectuals and journalists, too, do.

The phenomenon of overcompensation to appear “neutral” can also been
seen in Muslim intellectuals who go to great lengths to condemn some
low-hanging fruits of Islam.

However, the most potent transmission of objectivity occurs through the
delusions of activists. They convey views and news that favour their
patrons and harm their foes, but they do believe in their hearts that
they are practising some pious form of objective journalism. Always, the
best way to fool others is to first fool yourself.

Despite all these types of ‘objectivity’, in the perception of the
general public for whom the masquerade is erected, objectivity is truly
dead, chiefly in journalism. This is good, primarily because the end of
a long farce in any sphere of activity can only lead to good things.

A lot of what passes off as journalism should ideally be categorized as
the long tail of politics. Without the pretence of journalism and
objectivity, activists can then achieve much more. They don’t have to
expend energy tweaking things anymore to appear objective. They do not
have to feel like charlatans deep inside them, or hire the delusional to
achieve their ends. Also, overtly biased lament is in art territory.
AND, there is no conductor of ideas more powerful than art.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.*
