# Let us grant Kashmir freedom from Indian aesthetics

*2019-08-12*

When Indian politicians talk of “development” we know that they mean
clearing forests and shaving hills to spread a viral small town,
planting an “eight-lane” highway on which no one follows the lanes,
amoeba-like golf courses, and malls that are called “plazas” or even
malls. A few years ago, the Goan government even classified coconut
palms as grass so that the builders can raze them without permission.
Much thought goes into the ugliness of the great republic.

So, when India promises “development” to Kashmir, anyone who has seen
that exquisite place will be terrified even if he is not a career
alarmist. Now that India has politically co-opted Kashmir beyond
ambiguity, I propose we grant it freedom from Indian urban aesthetics
and from that amiable Indian tourist, who can trash a whole hill in no
time, and who shadows white women beseeching them for selfies. You may
want to argue it is very “elitist” to deny Kashmiris the dismal smog of
“development”, and to deny Indian tourists the right to do to Kashmir
what they have done to Shimla and Manali and Ooty. I do not wish to
quarrel with you on that matter today; instead, I will seed a thought:
Can Kashmir be a Bhutan, without the farce of official happiness, where
a high price tag regulates human traffic for a greater moral cause? In
fact, can Kashmir be the start of a more intelligent form of urban
planning and tourism in India?

How did it come to be that the astonishing integration of Kashmir, a
political masterstroke, has so easily acquired the moral masquerade of
development? How did a nation that could not “develop” vast regions in
its firm control have the confidence to officially integrate a reluctant
state in the name of progress?

On most days, if not all, an average Kashmiri resident has a better
quality of life than most Indians. He lives in a better home than an
average person in Mumbai; he is in the proximity of great beauty,
breathes clean air and, in the winters, he even skis down one of the
best slopes in the world. I would argue that in recent times he has
faced far lower risk of a human rights violation than an average poor
Indian because of the political spin given to any such violation. And,
crimes against women are low. But progress is always about change and
overrating change, and for long the young of Kashmir have felt the rot
of a life without prospects. In their hierarchy of wants, “development”
was much higher than what their liberal handlers let on.

When Kashmiris argue among themselves what do they argue about? What are
the two sides? Do they have two sides? A “debate” where everyone says
the same things to people who have similar views is called a litfest.
Everywhere else, among people who are not obsolete in their own time,
who debate in bazaars and restaurants, they spar over conflicting ideas.
For long, the most influential ambassadors of Kashmir have only
transmitted the hypothesis that all Kashmiris wish for independence from
India.

This was promoted by the sort of person who was born with the loudest
megaphone: an upper-caste Kashmiri feudal lord who was made to feel like
a social underdog by the Indian state, who knew how to talk to the
Western liberal elite, who knew what an “op-ed” was, who made up for all
his literary limitations through the hyperbole of homelessness and
subjugation.

Do you know of a society today where such a person and the poor agree on
an issue? Do sophisticates and the poor have identical views on politics
anymore? So, why has the world not heard the other side? In a polarized
world, where is the polarization in Kashmir? The most fervent wish of
the average Kashmiri was so drowned in the noise of making India the
villain that Narendra Modi’s liberation of Kashmir from its own elite in
the name of “development” may actually turn out to be a popular move in
the region.

A few years ago, I interviewed several Kashmiris, most of whom were not
activists or writers or politicians; many of them had never been
interviewed before. They were tired of politics, they were ready to move
on, they were ready to be co-opted by India if that would bring them
jobs and prosperity, because being co-opted by their elite did not get
them anywhere. Some of Kashmir’s cultural elite, too, wished to move on.
“But we can’t say it, you know,” one of them told me, “we can’t say it
publicly without a lot of our brothers from Dubai and America abusing
us.” The young spoke of wanting the trappings of progress, and
multinationals and malls, and cricket matches and fun. They made me
swear that I will not quote them because they would be shamed on social
media by their elite, including those who lived good lives in New York
and Dubai.

After I reported this attitude in a story titled *Sorry, Kashmir Is
Happy*, a few more educated and frustrated youth cautiously opened up to
me. One young man wrote to me saying that Kashmir is represented in the
global media “by a certain section of people who impose their political
ideology on others”.

I do hear now and then from my Kashmiri foes, too, who are chiefly
artistic. Every time something bad happens in Kashmir, they lampoon me
by saying, “Kashmir is happy.” They fear happiness, because it is trauma
that keeps their politics alive. I do not say Kashmir is happy today,
but then in this world, it is hard to escape happiness.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
