# Why we need not be paranoid about nationalism

*2019-06-10*

Many years before Indians developed an affection for their soldiers, and
a very expensive cricketer endorsed military insignia free of cost,
there was an earthquake in Gujarat. The 2001 Bhuj quake killed many
thousands. In a town called Anjar, I saw a man sitting on top of a
cupboard that was resting on the body of his own brother. He was
breaking the cupboard with a knife. He said there were jewels, money and
perfume bottles inside. He wanted to extract them before the soldiers,
who were conducting rescue missions, arrived. The word in the area was
that the soldiers were stealing valuables. A jawan would later tell me:
“I am sick of some of these people. Once they realize their family is
dead, they quickly think of what to do next. Just now a woman asked me
to bring an *almirah* out. She said there is
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>3,50,000 in there. She also said that she
will be watching me.”

It was another age when Indians revered dead soldiers, but were not so
respectful of the living, whom they treated as their hires. Today,
Indians take the armed forces very seriously. They may not trust them
with their own jewels, but if they heard someone else being so
suspicious of the gallant men, they would be honestly outraged.

At the on-going ICC Cricket World Cup, M.S. Dhoni proudly wore gloves
that had the insignia of the special forces, to which he does not
belong. It appears most Indians do not think there is anything wrong
with that. He is, after all, an Indian gladiator. But Dhoni does not
play cricket for India as is commonly believed. He is an employee of a
co-operative society called the Board of Control for Cricket in India,
which is affiliated to an offshore trust registered in British Virgin
Islands called the International Cricket Council. The World Cup is a
contest between private clubs. People are not ignorant of such facts,
but wish to see themselves in every great story in front of them and
they enter the fable, in an expensive way, by lending a team of athletes
the identity of their tribe, their nation to a sports team.

Until recently, sports was among the very few areas where Indians
expressed their patriotism. This has changed. Nationalism has gone
mainstream in modern India. The recent draft of the National Education
Policy, for instance, has conveyed that it plans to make national pride
an important part of an Indian child’s upbringing. Most people today
spring to a willing attention when the national anthem is played in
theatres. When this farce began in Mumbai’s cinema halls over 15 years
ago, I would keep sitting and some self-righteous simpleton from behind
would poke me and I would ask the facile patriot in which language the
anthem was written (many said Sanskrit or Hindi, and even at this very
moment, I am sure thousands of Chowkidars are Googling the answer).
Today, it is dangerous for me to behave in this manner. All three
superstar Khans have flaunted their patriotism by singing the anthem on
the screen. About four years ago, when word broke that the film-maker
Kiran Rao had told her husband Aamir Khan that she wished to quit India
because of what she thought was an atmosphere of hatred, Indians erupted
in anger, including expat patriots who had actually quit India for a
better life.

Even as recently as the early 1980s, Indians made fun of India. In jokes
where men of various nationalities entered a bar, the Indian turned out
to the dumbest, if there was no Pakistani among them. We had a very low
opinion about our nation. At a convocation ceremony at the Indian
Institute of Technology in Chennai, the chief guest said “brain drain is
better than brain in the drain” and there was a standing ovation. Most
of that same audience will not tolerate such a statement today.

But is nationalism evil, as global intellectuals make it out to be? Like
any powerful idea, religion for instance, nationalism can be used by
dangerous men, but there are other ways to look at it.

The Indian intellectual’s theoretical contempt for it is foolish
plagiarism of an old irrelevant European paranoia of nationalism. He has
been trying to convey a distinction between “nationalism” and
“patriotism”. Western intellectuals from the time of George Orwell, too,
have tried to do this—to defame nationalism as the malice of bad people
and celebrate patriotism as the love of good people. A few months ago,
French President Emmanuel Macron deployed beautiful language to make the
false distinction: “Nationalism is a betrayal of patriotism. By putting
our own interests first, with no regard for others, we erase the very
thing that a nation holds dearest, and the thing that keeps it alive:
Its moral values.”

But the fact is that every time intellectuals have tried to explain an
idea by splitting hairs over the etymology of words, you can be sure
they are confused themselves. Two different words do not create two
branches of a powerful human emotion. As a note reads in the film
*Birdman*: “A thing is a thing, not what is said of that thing.”

For most people who feel it, nationalism and patriotism are the same
thing. And, it is more than a ploy to recruit poor men to die for the
nation.

The most underrated quality of national pride is that it is a precursor
to national shame. A newly and immensely proud society will soon
demonstrate collective shame. For its flaws, its bad air quality, its
poor roads, its filth, its corruption and its castes. Nationalism may
not make Indians pay their taxes honestly, but it will inspire them to
do many other useful things.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.*
