# Why it’s smart for the ruling party to tell another story

*2019-12-22*

Everybody has won. The ongoing public protests in several cities against
a new immigration policy is a highly valuable advertisement of the idea
that India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party is the only organization in
the world that has the back of Hindus, and that it will reduce the
competition on the streets for unskilled Hindus at the expense of Muslim
immigrants. But Indians who are ashamed of the BJP, too, have won.

The poignant spectacle of their protests on the streets has conveyed to
the world that ordinary Indians care for Muslims. Whether this is true
is irrelevant to this paragraph. In global perception, India appears to
be morally superior than the government it elected. Some people may even
believe that Indians are pelting stones at buses out of love for
Muslims.

Muslims, too, have won. They now know their fate is a lot better than
that of large-denomination notes in 2016; it is not going to be easy for
anyone to delegitimize any of them all of a sudden. “Students” won, too,
as the word “students” has suddenly acquired a noble heft, as though
they all do something very important, very sacred.

Indian politics, often unappreciated because it does not look as suave
as in Western democracies, won as it demonstrated yet again how chaos,
opportunism and melodrama force the powerful to articulate that India is
primarily an ethical idea. Home minister Amit Shah, for instance,
reached out to some journalists to explain that he has been
misunderstood, and that the government is not trying to make India a
“Hindu country”. He pointed out that the new amendment to the
citizenship act will not take away the citizenship of any Indian; it
will only grant citizenship to some immigrants—those who have fled three
neighbouring nations, and who have been in India before 2014 and who are
not Muslims.

The argument that Indian Muslims have nothing to fear seems flawed,
though. India has not defined who exactly a citizen will be. We have a
modified citizenship act that does not say which documents will
conclusively prove citizenship. Why shouldn’t poor Muslims be worried?
What if the new citizenship policy turns out to be yet another grand
plan of this government that was “a good idea” but whose implementation
was bad?

In recent interviews, Shah said the accession of Kashmir beyond any
ambiguity and the National Register of Citizens in Assam, which the
government plans to extend to the whole nation, were the promises of the
morally feeble Congress party, which his more efficient and courageous
party has converted into actuality. And he said his new citizenship
policy was a Nehruvian ideal, especially the idea that India will be the
natural home for all persecuted Hindus of the world. But when the BJP
implements Congress ideas, he said, it suddenly becomes “communal”.

As a storyteller, which every political party is, there is something
that the BJP has to come to terms with. As this column once argued: “In
public perception, the Congress party has a monopoly over corruption in
a way the BJP has a monopoly over communal injustice even though all
significant political parties in India have been revealed as corrupt and
communal. Charges of communal atrocities just don’t stick on the
Congress for the same reasons that charges of corruption don’t stick on
the BJP.” All stories that the BJP chooses to tell has to take this into
account. Also, the fact that strong men often are poor storytellers.

The chief storytellers of the BJP are men who have reasons to venerate
human strength and positivity, while all of literature is a lesson that
what transmits a story is the element of human vulnerability. Shah has
defended his new immigration policy with reason and logic, but he
appears unconvincing to many because India often does not implement a
policy with logic and reason, and so the immense human suffering that
Muslims fear has much substance. Imagine a Muslim family torn apart,
some of them put in detention centres because they do not have their
papers?

There is a reasonable story, though, that the BJP can focus on, which
is, that it wants to give it all to poor Indians instead of sharing it
with poor foreigners, and for this reason has to dissuade poor
immigrants from entering the nation. No one seriously condemns the BJP
for this strand of the story, just that it cannot use Islam as a
disqualifier. Other nations do discriminate, but they do it with cunning
and sophistication. Often decency is the act of hiding indecency.

While the new immigration policy does favour the BJP in the short term,
it contributes to a political idea that can harm the party over the next
decade. Already, the political bloc against the BJP is not merely a
chaotic assembly of regional parties and harmless academics, but of a
powerful emotion. And the emotion is not something as innocuous as
“secularism”, which the party rightly does not fear, but something more
potent. Just like any Indian who is moving up the social ladder is a
natural patron of the BJP, it has come to be that any Indian who feels
he is going down, who feels insecure and threatened, or is melancholic
for any reason is becoming a natural foe of the party.

The BJP should attempt to tell another story. Maybe it can start with
the claim that India is home to all “persecuted” neighbours. It is,
after all, easier to define “persecution” than “citizenship”. I stake my
entire journalistic reputation when I say Pervez Musharraf will not
apply for citizenship.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
