# A new definition of women is strange but popular

*2019-05-03*

On Wednesday, a respectable body of people that included scientists,
defined women. As humans who are deficient in a very useful hormone. And
it appears that a majority of women in the world see wisdom in this.

The Court of Arbitration for Sport, the highest court for settling
disputes in international sports, was looking into a protest by South
African middle-distance runner Caster Semenya, who has an abnormally
high level of testosterone for a woman. The International Association of
Athletics Federations had deemed this a disqualification from women’s
events. The normal female range of testosterone, as indicated by the
court, is 0.06 to 1.68 nanomolecules per litre (nm/L) of blood, and the
male range is 7.7 to 29.4. The hormone contributes significantly to the
strengthening of muscles and the density of bones. Its abundance in men
is a crucial factor that makes male athletes perform better than female
athletes. This, and the under-appreciated fact that the testicles of a
man miraculously hang at different lengths so that they don’t collide
when he runs.

Semenya’s defence was that the high level of hormone in her body is a
blessing, her genius. But it has been for long an overt and discreet
view in the athletic world that a runner with such high levels of
testosterone is, very simply, “a man”.

Both, those who support the court and those who are enraged by the
verdict, have excellent reasons. What the issue brings up is that
“balance” and “objectivity” are not virtues, but qualities that are
attainable only for people who have no real stake in the matter.

For a majority of women in the world who are “normal”, and for a
minority who are hyperandrogenous (women whose bodies produce an
excessive amount of male sex hormones) there is much at stake. The fight
is not over which side is moral, but over which hierarchy of moral
values is more humane.

Why couldn’t the court define a woman as a human whose 23rd chromosomal
pair is “XX”? After all, didn’t we learn in school that men and women
are defined by their pair of sex chromosomes?

Female is “XX” and male is “XY”. But that is not the contemporary
scientific opinion. “XY” does not conclusively mean “male”. There are
women with many female biological traits who have “XY”. This is how the
matter looks today: All men are “XY”, but not all “XY” are men. And, all
“XX” are women, but not all women are “XX”.

For female athletes with “XX” sex chromosomes, the International
Association of Athletics Federations places no limit on the testosterone
levels in their bodies. If an “XX” woman has as much of it as Usain
Bolt, the world’s athletics federations are willing to consider her
gifted, rather than a man. But such a person is unheard of. Almost all
female athletes with high testosterone are “XY”. Semenya, too. And for
now, she and others like her will have to reduce their testosterone
levels to under 5 nm/L to compete among women. It will slow them down.

Lamenting the decision, nbcnews.com ran a headline: Caster Semenya Is
Being Forced To Alter Her Body To Make Slower Runners Feel Secure In
Their Womanhood.

When people have little to lose, as in a dinner conversation about
transgenders, they are willing to accept esoteric notions such as
“gender is a spectrum”. They are willing to attack feminists like
Germaine Greer, who said that being a woman is an innate condition and a
man cannot simply perform a surgery on himself and become a woman just
because he imagines he is one. But sports have succeeded where Greer’s
feminism has failed.

From my conversations, and from what is emanating in the media, it
appears that many women support the feminization of testosterone levels
in athletes, and for practical reasons. The very idea of a separate
category for women is lost if the hyperandrogenous are going to take
over the field.

For young girls to be drawn to sports that require them to invest and
sacrifice much, they need role models. And girls are more influenced by
women than by men. This is the central logic in professional chess,
which has separate tournaments for women. Some pious men find it
insulting to women that there must be separate categories based on
gender in a sport that requires no brawn, but anyone who has a daughter
will know it is wise. If you have tried to teach your daughter football,
cricket or chess, you will quickly realize that the primary odds they
face is the scarcity of role-models.

In a world that is striving to be fair and just, more and more
hyperandrogenous athletes are able to pursue sports. In the future, if
they are left to their innate gifts, they might become the face of
women’s sports. The fact is, sports constitute a highly visible and
glorious representation of women, and they don’t wish to be represented
by men, or maleness. Or by a certain sexual ambiguity.

But this is not a uniform view. Semenya, for instance, is deeply admired
in her country as a woman. So is Dutee Chand, the Indian athlete who had
a similar problem and, in fact, started the whole dispute.

Some people have suggested that there be a third category in sporting
events: For those who cannot be assuredly considered women. But this
will not only diminish the top hyperandrogenous athletes, whose art
might be relegated to a fringe, freak show, it would also destroy the
prestige of women’s events, which could end up downgraded to a third
tier.
