# Why you may not know that Anna Hazare is on a fast

*2019-02-03*

In some intellectual fields, success occurs when influential people
misunderstand a piece of work. Revolutions, too, succeed when they are
misunderstood by the right people. Anna Hazare, for instance, could
create a public frenzy in the summer of 2011 because of a string of
misinterpretations, delusions and naive beliefs within some cabals.

On Thursday, he went on a death-fast again chiefly to coerce politicians
into appointing virtuous anti-corruption super babus who will have power
over the very people who appointed them. Even if he chooses to actually
die rather than drink the orange juice of failure, here are the reasons
why Hazare will fail to create an anti-corruption movement a second
time.

Now they know him too well in Delhi. You will find it hard to believe
this but the fact is that in 2011 when he arrived in Delhi to sit on the
death fast, Delhi’s editors had very little knowledge of who exactly
Hazare was. They thought he was an endearing and inconsequential old man
from rural Maharashtra. They were not aware that he was philosophically
closer to the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh than to European
enlightenment. But this factor, on its own, is not so important. There
is something more interesting.

At the time of Hazare’s fast, the top rung of India’s television news
was in a moral crisis following the revelation of the Niira Radia tapes,
a set of leaked telephone conversations between a lobbyist and public
figures that showed some influential journalists as pawns of
corporations and the government. Hazare’s “anti-corruption” movement
gave powerful journalists an opportunity to posture that they could
“speak truth to power”. As a result, Hazare’s movement got the support
of both the liberal media and the fledgling other side, leading to a
news coverage that was extraordinary and disproportionate to the actual
size and scope of the movement during the first 48 hours of what was
merely one of Hazare’s many fasts.

Among the journalistic stories that build public perception, some emerge
from beat reporters and some from their bosses, the editors. The public
perception that the “right to information” was an achievable vital right
emerged from reporters who covered a modest semi-urban movement for many
months. The public perception that Rahul Dravid is “The Wall”, and that
being “The Wall” was a precious talent, did not emerge from lowly sports
reporters but from aesthete editors. Usually, the perceptions that
emerge from reporters have more substance but the perceptions that
editors build are often more powerful. Hazare’s revolution was the
creation of editors. But now, too many things have changed for him to be
a beneficiary yet again.

In 2011, much of India’s urban middle class was politically naive. It
ought to be noted that at the time, in Kerala and West Bengal, where the
political faculties of the middle class was highly evolved, the
anti-corruption movement made little impact. In those two states, people
did not start strutting around in the “I Am Anna” caps and regular
citizens did not start spontaneous death fasts of their own. But for
other urban Indians, the fast was their first glimpse into a political
movement, and they transmitted the revolution through the current of
naive passion. Now, the urban middle class is far from naive; it is
deeply political.

The fact is that Hazare dislikes the urban upper middle class. In fact,
in 2011, the first two days of his revolutionary fast were not merely
anti-politician, it was essentially anti-rich. He and his followers
lamented that politicians were building roads and airports when farmers
were starving. But when Team Anna saw the support of the urban middle
class, the anti-corruption movement became a clearly focused movement
against politicians.

In that form, it was an anti-Congress movement not only because the
Congress was at the helm of the government. In fact, the anti-corruption
movement got urban support only because its arch villain was the
Congress. In public perception, the Congress party has a monopoly over
corruption in a way the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has a monopoly over
communal injustice even though all significant political parties in
India have been revealed as corrupt and communal. Charges of communal
atrocities just don’t stick on the Congress for the same reasons that
charges of corruption don’t stick on the BJP. Hazare is going to find
out that this time he is suddenly not as contagious as in 2011.

But there is a triumph that the liberal media has won for the Congress
in the recent months, which is to show farmers as a distressed
community. Once you define someone as a vulnerable group, it is easy to
show the BJP as a majoritarian villain. If Hazare’s latest fast was
entirely dedicated to the cause of the farmers, he may have greater
success.

Hazare may still have succeeded if he had one important quality of
Gandhi. Gandhi was a part of the ruling social elite who had to
masquerade as a poor man. He could set the agenda. The elite were with
him. Hazare is not a part of the contemporary elite. Forget setting the
agenda, he was probably used as an employee by a section of the middle
class to bring Narendra Modi to power. His true loyal base is the
impoverished small farmer.

I do believe though that Hazare does not contest elections for the same
reasons as Gandhi—pride presented as disdain for electoral politics. But
then the only way to sustain a political movement in India is by
accepting that it is political. 

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist,most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
