# The right way to threaten Indians into driving well

*2019-09-09*

Observe the guy who has been driving like a moron and has finally
crashed—he is stunned. It is the same expression on the man who is
driving on the wrong side of the national highway and sees a truck
coming at him—he is baffled.

Only the cow, which crosses the road like an Indian, is not surprised by
things. Human Indians, on the other hand, are constantly startled by the
most natural outcome of their actions. In fact, the national emotion of
India is surprise. A few days ago, when the government finally increased
fines for traffic violations by many times, Indians were, again,
baffled.

The move to make fines hefty is an excellent idea. Union transport
minister Nitin Gadkari justified the high fines by saying he wants
Indians to fear the law. This is part of an on-going reformation of
Indians. Keep the nation clean, pay taxes and don’t drive like a moron.
But Gadkari missed an important step between threatening Indians and
getting them to do the right things.

First, let me invoke a national mystery: Why is it that Indians do not
spit or litter when they are in the Delhi Metro system? The same people
who have no notions of civic respect, who in fact demonstrate a
conscious disrespect for public spaces, surrender their feral freedoms
on the Delhi Metro. This phenomenon holds across all filthy cities that
are building or expanding modern Metro systems.

I believe that we can understand civic order in the Delhi Metro without
the hilarious hypothesis of the sweet conscientious Indian.

When Delhi Metro opened its shutters, it was an extraordinary service
and unprecedented in a nation that had until then viewed good design and
air-conditioning as too much of a luxury for the majority. (Even the
private sector had that view. Once, a top executive of a call centre in
Gurgaon told me: “The swanky office is to impress the foreign client.
Some of our people who work inside, I know they would be happy in a
cowshed.”)

Initially, the poor among commuters were mildly intimidated by the Delhi
Metro. It was the first time that they had been allowed entry into a
space that had escalators, automatic doors and clear instructions pasted
everywhere. Yet, they were not in a swanky mall, they were not
trespassers trying to steal cool air or glimpses of the rich. Those
days, labourers and maids were so overwhelmed that they whispered
instead of speaking aloud. Now, they have got used to the service.

The Delhi Metro was, and still is, the anti-matter of India. Trains
arrived when the electronic board said they would, even when the time
displayed was not divisible by five or 10. As the Delhi Metro was
excellent at most things it did, commuters took seriously its threat of
heavy fines for spitting and throwing garbage. The system conveyed that
if it can run such a good service, it also knows how to fine.

The nature of stature is that it is something people grant and then they
are awestruck by the very thing they themselves have granted. Delhi
Metro has stature. Also, the trains and the platforms are so well
designed that commuters have very little reason to violate its codes.

Of course, there are moments when India triumphs over the Delhi Metro,
but most of the time the Metro prevails. Because it first created all
the facilities, and then tutored, pleaded, threatened and implemented
its threats.

Indian roads, on the other hand, are poorly designed and managed. Most
countries in plain sight look richer than they really are. Indian roads
make India look much poorer than what it is.

I live in Gurugram, where traffic signals hide behind trees, most roads
do not have markers for pedestrians to cross and, like most Indians,
they never really cross the road; rather, they flee death with that
sheepish expression of being encroachers in their own city. And, the
face of the government, the cops, elicit no respect, not only because of
their reputation, but also because of how they look, their cheap
uniforms and how they wear those uniforms, and how they place barricades
squeezing dense traffic into zig-zag formations, India’s definition of
“security”, and how they sit on the roadside on plastic chairs, their
large paunches like babies on their laps; and how six of them hide under
flyovers to pounce on motorists in the great game that is the Indian
daily life.

What India’s traffic system has not learned from Delhi Metro is that for
a threat of fines to be effective, you should first win the respect of
those you threaten.

This is exactly the reason why the Swachh Bharat movement, too, has had
very little success. Why Mahatma Gandhi failed in this matter is very
different from why Narendra Modi might. Gandhi commanded immense
respect, but he failed because the greatest ambassador of political
disruption and civic disorder cannot simultaneously be an icon of order.
And cleanliness is entirely about order. Modi is a far more influential
icon of order, but his cleanliness project may yet be doomed because its
agencies have not won the respect of Indians through the excellence of
their services.

Order makes Indians unhappy. They will use any ruse to romanticize and
pursue chaos. If the government does not build its stature, its high
fines will not control the wizards of chaos. The same incompetence of
the system that designs bad roads will ensure that the market forces of
bribery will enable cops and motorists to arrive at a happy equilibrium.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
