# Indians scorn 'dynasties' but are raising pampered children

*2019-06-02*

From what I gather, Rahul Gandhi is a good man, the kind of man who will
win at the end of the main story arc in pulp fiction. There is something
banal about his good nature, which is exactly how goodness resides in
most of us. As a decent man, he is aware of his luck. Seven years ago,
he said: “My father was in politics. My grandmother and
great-grandfather were in politics. So, it was easy for me to enter
politics. This is a problem. I am a symptom of this problem.” There is a
general view, even among those who like him, that he is so privileged,
so protected that he does not know much about life and the feral real
world. He is a modern Prince Siddhartha, who is a peepal tree short. He
is what our children will become.

We are all raising Rahul Gandhis. Even the Chowkidars who have scorn for
Gandhi raise their own children to be him. On this aspect of parenting,
there is no polarization. Everyone admires Narendra Modi; everyone is
raising Rahul Gandhis at home.

Even those who were once underdogs, the proud self-made, are not
training their children to start at the bottom and find their way to the
top. Our children have never taken public buses, or eaten real street
food. They may not even have Indian bugs in their gut. They speak the
language of their parents very poorly, that is, if they speak it at all.
They have never talked to the poor, only instructed them. They have
always travelled in a car, watching a menacing nation pass by, dreading
at traffic lights the urchins and beggars who arrive to plead.
Ten-year-olds in my charmed colony have never gone to a shop alone to
buy things for their home. And even if some of them do go down those
500m to the market, they are equipped with phones and WhatsApp
location-tracking, and they are filled by their parents with the terrors
of life and all that can go wrong. Even large adolescent boys, their
inner thighs colliding, walk with tiny maids half their size who carry
their bulky cricket kits. As they grow older, they will be even more
protected, in less obvious but more substantial ways. Our children are
island people whose nation is the sea. And their parents make fun of
Rahul Gandhi.

It is true that Gandhi’s social privileges did not prepare him to face
the feral men of Indian politics who were naturally selected, who had to
be extremely capable to come so far. But then, the fact is that a Modi
is rare even in politics. Across all spheres of Indian life, the
rags-to-riches story is uncommon today. That is why raising Rahul
Gandhis is an inevitable parenting strategy.

The privileged usually win. Technology, business, arts, mainstream
cinema and other occupations where talent is subordinate to lineage are
dominated by Rahul Gandhis. The Indian elite have 100% reservation for
their own genetic material, the reason why it is comical when they
insult quotas for Dalits in colleges and jobs.

The objective of a family is to give its children unfair advantages. In
that sense, every good family is a cartel.

There was a time, not long ago, when it appeared that this was true only
in India. As a child, what struck me about Hollywood films was an
America where parents did not have any meaningful control over
adolescents, and where college education did not appear mandatory. In
those stories, parents usually told their children they would not be
paying for their college, while in my Chennai, the engineering or
medical college was an inevitability, and fathers were whipping their
sons who lost 1% in maths. In retrospect, this arrangement made sense.
In nations where the state was unreliable, families had to be strong.
They were crucial. Hence, parents could exercise great control and the
servitude of dependant adult children was passed off as tradition. And
in countries where the youth could depend on the state, the young seemed
to be adventurous and independent. But now, modern American families
have begun to resemble Indian.

About four years ago, the then US president Barack Obama said: “America
thrived in the 20th century because we made high school free, sent a
generation of GIs to college, and trained the best workforce in the
world. But in a 21st-century economy that rewards knowledge like never
before… two in three job openings will require some higher education.
Two in three. And yet, we still live in a country where too many bright,
striving Americans are priced out of the education they need.”

In response to this age of aristocracy, the American middle classes are
supporting their children well into their 20s, funding their education
and lifestyles, and protecting them from the tumults of life. Across the
world, parents are raising Rahul Gandhis.

Our children will join a global monoculture of decent,
ecologically-conscious privileged youth, who will type angry or sly
essays about the evils of inequality. They will unknowingly protect
their turfs by creating social and intellectual tribes whose doors will
be shut to most of the youth.

We do realize the unfairness of passing on privileges to our children,
but what can parents do? Are they supposed to impoverish their children?

It is amusing that the person who has reminded us of the most reasonable
solution is Rahul Gandhi. About six years ago, Gandhi said he was
choosing bachelorhood. “If I get married and have children, I will be
status-quoist and will like my children to take my place.” Assuming he
was not just trying to get out of a relationship, this was an act of
kindness that many of us did not do.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
