# The Gandhis and the power of the second-best choice

*2019-01-27*

The formal entry of Priyanka Gandhi into electoral politics has
reaffirmed an old conviction of Indians that the most powerful members
of the Congress consider themselves subordinate to the Gandhi family and
that they believe the family is the best bet to lead them. This is a
wrong hypothesis today.

I believe that P. Chidambaram’s best idea for party leadership is P.
Chidambaram. And Shashi Tharoor’s is Shashi Tharoor. And Kapil Sibal’s
is Kapil Sibal. But what is their second-best idea? The enduring charm
of the Gandhis is not that they are the Congress’s best bet, but that
they are everyone’s second-best bet

In many aspects of life, the second best idea is more influential than
the best idea because the best idea is often you, or yours, but the
second-best idea is almost everyone’s second-best idea.

I do not say that the best idea always loses to the second best. Just
that the second-best idea is more likely to win and we can see this
likelihood in democratic systems such as modern marriage and policy
making, and also in autocratic systems such as your parents’ marriage,
corporations and terror hierarchies. The most important quality of the
second-best idea is that the players grow to believe it is innately the
best idea

I must tell you my favourite ISI story. When the US used to fund
Afghanistan’s war against Russia through several channels, including
Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence, Hamid Gul, the then head of ISI,
had backed one of the seven major Afghan tribal chiefs, Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar. Many years later, the journalist Lawrence Wright asked Gul
why he had favoured Hekmatyar. Gul told Wright,“I went to each of the
seven, you see, and I asked them, ‘I know you are the strongest, but who
is No. 2?’… They all said Hekmatyar.

The most respectable avatar of the second-best idea is“consensus”. When
seen in this form, we can understand democracy itself as a network of
second-best ideas. Consensus is a deceptive word, which conveys a sense
that it is a tweaked version of the best idea or that it contains the
spirit of the best idea. The second-best idea is often a whole different
line of thought.

The power of the second best is as common in our daily lives as in the
grand political events of our times. For instance, the world’s pursuit
of health, too, is in the power of the second best. The best solution to
any form of addiction is abstinence

Ideally people should renounce the whole way of life that makes them
smoke and the whole culture that makes them eat refined grain and sugar.
However, this idea is not as influential as moderation. People are more
likely to begin their path to recovery but by cutting down on the
poisons rather than giving up. This, though, is a rare case where the
best idea is actually better than the second best in practice.

Also, people have fantastic ideas about their ideal romance but in the
end they choose Plan B as mates. It is as though in matters of love,
Plan A does not really exist.

In the practical world, the best idea usually has very serious and
fundamental flaws. It is, at times, a mythical ideal created by a
thinker’s articulation, which makes no sense in reality. Like communism,
for instance. Or, it has its origin sin academic thought experiments
that the world has taken too seriously.

In economics, the theory of the second-best was formalised in 1956 when
economists Richard Lipsey and Kelvin Lancaster laid out their“General
Theory of the Second Best”.“Free

Exchange”, a blog of The Economist, once argued that the most important
aspect of the theory is that it shows that the best idea is often an
impractical ideal and that the second-best ideas are doomed if they try
to imitate the qualities of the best idea. Rather, the finest
second-best idea “may look starkly different than the first best”. The
blog adds,“To say that we live in a second best world is just to say we
live in the real world, not a blackboard model… The best policy-oriented
economists, both left and right, are second best economists in the sense
that they grasp the lesson of their fictions, but aim at truly feasible
ideals, not blackboard utopias.”

This is a reason why those who hate demonetization are wrong in
condemning it by saying it was a bad idea. They should condemn it as the
best idea. That was the real issue with DeMo. It was the theoretical
ideal to destroy illicit cash, according to those who had the power to
push the idea through. It may not be the disaster that critics make it
out to be, but considering the havoc it caused in the practical world,
its impact was modest. It appears that Indians have gone back to their
old corrupt ways. DeMo has not broken a deep national habit.

The non-moralistic way of looking at financial immorality is that the
morality of taxation is merely an idea. Some will argue that, all things
considered, handing out protection money to the state, or tax
compliance, is the best idea for a citizen. But then some will argue
that tax-evasion is the second-best idea.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
