# Democracy is going to get more democratic, and worse

*2019-07-28*

Over the past few days, millions of people in Karnataka realized that
they had wasted their time queuing up to cast their votes and posting
pictures of their stained finger on Instagram. The legislators they had
elected resigned to favour the very party they had been elected to
subdue. In general political opinion, they had sold their souls.
Familiar sights followed: Political parties herded their legislators
into air-conditioned buses, transferred them to luxury hotels where they
were sequestered so that they were not poached, and those who were
already poached were not re-bought. I wonder what is more demeaning—to
be a sell-out, or to be hidden away in a resort because your boss thinks
you are a potential sell-out? The herding of legislators is an enduring
and recurring mascot of Indian politics, and a part of the global
reminders this month that the world’s most adored idea, democracy, is
going to get a lot worse in the coming years.

In Britain, a bumbling, ignorant and an unremarkable man became prime
minister. In the United States, there is already such a man in place who
has demonstrated that almost all the theories that the elite American
press had propagated on what makes an electable president are wrong.
These men may not be as useless as intellectuals allege, but they are
certainly not men who make democracy look like a great idea.

Yet, when we see the young in Hong Kong taking great risks to demand
democracy from China, we are trained to accept that their fight is worth
it all, that democracy is worth it all. Democracy has become one of
those sacred things whose inherent morality is above question. But then
I do wonder if Hong Kong’s activists are fighting merely for the
emergence of daft, poachable men.

The flaws of democracy have always been known to its greatest champions.
But all along we were told that the thing about the idea of democracy is
that it will get better with time. The idea that democracy will evolve
into something greater was not a result of a confusion about the nature
of democracy, but about evolution. We are trained to think that
evolution is a transformation into something better, because that is how
humans imagine they appeared—as an improved ape. But evolution is merely
change.

In the transmission of ideas and news, the pundits have fallen. People
are free to receive information from comforting sources and to transmit
news, feeling the glory of being celebrities to 15 followers. Technology
is ensuring that democracy is increasingly representing human minds
accurately, and we did not anticipate that it may not be a flattering
phenomenon. The evangelists of democracy themselves lament that the
problem with democracy today is that there is too much of it.

When Barack Obama’s campaign first used social media to influence
American voters, it had the blessings of the elite media. He may have
been a political outsider, but in many significant ways, like his
academic degrees, he was an insider in the intellectual aristocracy that
ran his nation. That is why his use of Facebook was celebrated. But
when, eventually, Donald Trump used it to reach his constituency,
Facebook itself was defamed as a villainous Russian platform.

Even as recently as 2016, there was a mainstream intellectual view that
the natural progressive evolution of all democracies is towards direct
democracy, when people will vote on a range of issues via referendums,
without intermediaries. In 2011, activist Prashant Bhushan told me: “Our
democracy is based on the technology that was available in the 1940s.
Now that we have more powerful technologies, the scope of democracy,
too, must expand.” But then, Brexit made many intellectuals change their
mind about the virtues of referendums. They now feel that the world has
to be protected from people who don’t think like them.

Democracy, naturally, is not in a crisis for a large mass of people,
especially those who feel they have been liberated from the old elite.
The supporters of Trump, Brexit and Narendra Modi, and others who do not
respect *The New York Times* or *The Economist* may believe that
democracy has finally gotten better, and fairer. The perception of
democracy might be subjective, at least for the moment, before the
effects of the new class of leaders become clear, but there is no
escaping the inherent flaw of electoral democracy, which is the
“electoral” part.

It was this idea of competition that the early evangelists of democracy
had thought will make democracy evolve into something more moral and
effective. We tend to think highly of the corrective power of
competition because the story is usually told by the victors. Our own
ape story is told by us and not the apes whom we obliterated.

Peter Thiel, the co-founder of PayPal and a venture capitalist, has
argued that in business, competition is destructive because it forces
companies that do not make differentiated products to squander away all
their resources on the battle and in undercutting the rival. “Monopoly
is the condition of every successful business,” he writes in his book
*Zero To One*.

Monopoly, in an electoral democracy, is a contradiction. Major political
parties in India whose politicians are largely undifferentiated
products, are in a state of perpetual corrosive war that has a profound
effect on actual governance. In the future, elections will be even more
expensive than they are today. But there will always be luxury resorts
worthy of hosting men who are for sale.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
