# What Joker should learn from real-life supervillains

*2019-10-13*

Sometimes we can see the precise moment when an exquisite story
collapses into ordinariness. In *The Vegetarian*, a novel by the South
Korean writer Han Kang, a woman stops eating meat. This might seem
unremarkable for Indians, but as the woman is located in Seoul, where
eating meat is so sensible that it borders on sanity, her decision
shakes the foundations of her life. Bonds break. Her family does what
families are very good at—punishing. As her world falls apart, she is
resolute in her decision, and she calmly watches her own destruction.
This is what makes the novel exquisite; the reaction of people to a
woman’s simple decision. But then, late in the novel, she begins to
imagine she is a tree. This reveals her as an insane lady and here is
where the novel falters and it releases us forever from its power.

The madness of the sane is powerful; the madness of the mad is merely a
freak show.

I believe that writers who have great material on the insane should not
ruin it by being too earnest and plainly presenting the protagonist as
insane. Instead, the hero should be presented as “normal” with an
abnormal trait. If a writer describes the mental condition of a
character too much, he or she will deny the reader an opportunity to
play his or her most important and underrated role in literature—to
misunderstand.

Through misunderstanding, a reader makes convenient political and
emotional assumptions, and in that way, deeply “identifies” with the
character.

Misunderstanding is highly influential in the real world too. Across
centuries, the insane have created revolutions because people did not
know them to be insane, or did not wish to know the facts.

Misunderstanding is a good conductor of ideas, and of the fables of not
only heroes, but also of villains. This is why *Joker*, which is a
fantasy of darkness like all superhero films these days, fails in its
ambition to be an exquisite film. It explains too much. We are told, in
many ways, that its protagonist is mentally ill. A man whom we could
have otherwise misunderstood as the Che of our times prances along as a
freak. Director Todd Phillips appears to have learnt nothing from a way
of the modern world: a Muslim who goes on a shooting spree is a
“terrorist”, a powerful story that even defines global politics to an
extent; but a White man who does the same, in fact more frequently, is
merely a nut, which is a dull story.

The hero of *Joker* is a no-talent comedian who could have made up for
his limitations by becoming a conscientious leftist comedian. Instead,
he begins to express his rage at his own failures and calls for total
anarchy. He becomes a leftist who is not a comedian. Other losers then
make him their leader because, in an unfair system, order is surrender
to injustice, and anarchy is hope. Unlike us, the masses in the film do
not know of Joker’s madness. So they think he is a revolutionary, a
visionary, a super activist. A sad clown thus becomes a hero. In that
regard, *Joker* has some parallels with the real world, a world whose
revolutionary heroes are in reality evil, celebrated by a clueless pall
of unhappy people.

Joker lives in Gotham, a fictional adaptation of New York (I will never
understand why New York needs a fictional adaptation). His apartment is
small and bleak, and to emphasize that he is a “loser”, he is shown to
live with his mother, an emphasis many Indian men may not comprehend.

By the standards of Mumbai, Joker’s flat is a commodious
upper-middle-class dwelling for a family of just two. In every respect,
the people of Mumbai may say Joker has a very good life.

That is the triumph of American capitalism—it is hard for its
storytellers to show a poor urban White in a setting that most of the
world would recognize as poverty. I wonder, though, why Phillips did not
want to locate Joker as a homeless clown in a subway station. It would
have been fascinating to follow the life of a sane but flawed clown who
begs for a living in New York, who then wages a war on the city.
Instead, we have a man who lives better than most people in the world
calling to arms a fortunate affluent city, and a fellowship of
privileged losers responding.

Seen in that context, most of the world might see the point in a
statement made by a billionaire in the film: “Those of us who have made
something of our lives will always look at those who haven’t, and see
nothing but clowns.”

The most comical aspect of *Joker* is accidental: in Gotham, no
African-American man is ever a part of a crime. It is always Caucasians.
It is as though the film is terrified of real-life vigilantes who will
accuse it of racism. This is surprising cowardice for its creator Todd
Phillips, who wrote the brilliant comedy *Borat*, which disrespected
everything that mainstream society holds sacred, and wrote and directed
*The Hangover* comedy trilogy.

Phillips has been rewarded, however, for his *Joker*. Even before its
release, the film was guaranteed success by a network of
festival-critics and cinema entrepreneurs who loved it or hated or, who
saw in it “metaphors” and “commentary” and “incels”.

Perhaps the biggest favour they did the film was to misunderstand it.
They appear to have misunderstood its farce for anthropology. I hope one
day Todd Phillips will reveal that the film was a prank—on serious
people who see serious things in Marvel and DC Comics merchandise.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
laila, Armed and Dangerous’*
