# Six messages in Narendra Modi’s return to power

*2019-05-26*

The new alpha male of our times is a man who talks tough, but is also
unashamed of tearing up, and of touching the feet of older men. But
there are far deeper messages in the swag of Narendra Modi: One, if
there were objective measures like elections in every sphere of Indian
life, many Rahul Gandhis would be in trouble. Overnight, most of the
“elite” in arts, activism, journalism and academics would be replaced by
people who are more substantial, or admirable, or relevant.

Two, the Prime Minister of India can today face the whole nation and
make fun of “secularism”, as Modi did on Wednesday in his victory
speech. Secularism was always an atheist’s point of view on how
believers should behave. It never made sense to believers. In many
Western democracies, secularism is denying god the right to interfere
with law; in India; it means in practice, all gods have equal right to
meddle with life. In Indian journalism, secularism was mostly a vacuous
phrase and the subject of one of those foolish photo collages where the
juxtaposition of a temple, mosque and a church, all of them probably
encroaching public land, is portrayed as a demonstration of peaceful
co-existence. After Modi’s dig at secularism, some journalists pointed
out that the word was part of the Indian constitution (added late,
though, in 1976), as if this somehow made it some sacred quality of
Indian character. But then, Modi knew very early in his life that if a
nation had to proclaim it was secular, it probably was not.

Three, in his speech, he said that he will create an India where a
Pragya Thakur cannot win an election. Of course, he did not put it this
way, but that is the meaning of an expression he used: “Inclusive
India”. This is unlikely. There will not be such an India for years to
come. Modi was just reaching out, and being nice, which has its own
value.

The lesson for Muslims in this election has been that their guardians
have been duds. All those activists and poets and the “200 writers, 200
artists” who signed petitions were only good at signing petitions and
nothing more.

In new India, Muslims will certainly find opportunities to excel;
Muslims may continue to be film superstars, another Muslim might captain
the Indian cricketteam, but a measure of freedom in a country is also
the right to make a mistake and get away with it, or face only
proportionate punishment. Imagine a Muslim in a white cap getting into a
road scuffle with a Hindu. I don’t think this can happen anymore. For
some time now, I have sensed a restraint in public expressions by
Muslims, who in another time would have felt free enough to express
anger.

Maybe the people who feared Modi and donated their hard-earned money to
activist websites that claimed to be practising journalism may have been
cleverer had they bought those shady electoral bonds instead.

Four, for several months, we have been told that demonetization
destroyed the lives of the poor, and that the unemployment rate in India
was now the highest in 45 years. And that these factors had diminished
Modi politically. Yet he won.

Intellectuals now claim that nationalism and love for Modi are chiefly
responsible for his victory. But it is hard to believe that Modi’s
voters, who made up nearly 40% of the Indian electorate, would have
rewarded him if the impact of his reign were as bad as academics
claimed. Something about the average Indian voter’s relative prosperity,
optimism, employment patterns, the psychology of their labour
participation and about Aadhaar’s efficient distribution of welfare
benefits was not captured by journalists and academics, who saw what
they wanted to see.

Days after Modi announced the cancellation of big notes, I had argued in
*Hindustan Times* that this was politically a sound move. I had then
based my argument on how the average Indian, despite their own pains,
would perceive the panic of their feudal masters. Modi, in fact, has led
his party to over a dozen major electoral victories since
demonetization. I don’t believe, though, that the memory of middle-class
panic was relevant to this year’s general elections. Even so, if
everything that most columnists and academics said about the impact of
demonetization on the poor was accurate, Modi should have been routed. I
am not saying it was a great idea. I am saying you don’t take away the
money of the poor and win elections. So, Modi’s dramatic victory should
tell us that it was not the disaster that intellectuals made it out to
be.

Five, Kanhaiya Kumar would have realized by now that there is a mystical
relationship between the poor and the refined Nehruvians. The poor do
exactly the opposite of what the intellectuals have deemed the poor
should do for their own good. Now that Kumar knows student politics and
the admiration of the urbane does not prepare him for real life, he
should consider liberating himself from the employment of his
middle-class masters who have a habit of hiring revolutionaries. And, he
must accept one thing they did not teach him in Jawaharlal Nehru
University: that, when a guy mouths the same economic ideas that kept
his mother poor, then he has been co-opted by the same kind of people
who kept his mother poor.

Six, the sweet analysis of salad-eaters: “Priyanka should now enter
politics” turned out to be not such a great insight, after all. What are
the other important things they are wrong about?

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
