# There is proof that Nithyananda’s Kailaasa does exist

*2019-12-08*

About three years ago, a man who was once a techie proposed a startup
idea to a large audience: Indians who had insights into the afterlife
should approach billionaires, “like Bill Gates”, and ask them to put
billions in a trust for safekeeping that Indians would then return in
the next birth of the depositors, “when we find you”. There was
applause. On stage with the man was the chief dignitary of the event,
Nithyananda, who was then, as he is today, considered a spiritual being
by thousands of Indians. He nodded with a slow blink, exactly what
Tamilians do when they want to express calm, honest certainty about
something they are not certain about. “If we do a bit more research and
establish the authority,” he said, “it is possible.” They were serious,
these are very serious men.

Usually, Nithyananda does not share a stage; he says such things sitting
on a throne, alone. Once he said that he was developing “a software”
that can make animals talk. He even said, “Yesterday, I casually tested
the software, it was perfectly working.”

Like several spiritual gurus, Nithyananda faces rape charges. It appears
that he has fled India. A few days ago, he declared the birth of a new
nation called Kailaasa for pure Hindus who will follow “agamic”
traditions. By “agamic”, he was referring to its Sanskrit meaning, “that
which has come down”, and not the English meaning, which means
“asexual”. He said he was now spiritually ready “to initiate people into
levitation”.

He makes many Indians laugh. The role of Nithyananda, like some
entertainers, is to make you feel you are better.

But the truth is that his Kailaasa exists. Not merely in Ecuadorian
territory, as some claim, but in more familiar places. Like here in
India. Everything he said Kailaasa will be already exists as an Indian
reality in some form or another.

The simplest level of Kailaasa is its politics. Every persecuted Hindu
who wants to practise Hinduism will be admitted into Kailaasa. This,
coincidentally, resembles a strand from a piece of legislation the
Indian government expects to pass that will grant citizenship to Hindus
(among others) who have fled other countries. If you follow the
undercurrent of Nithyananda’s declaration, Kailaasa is actually a refuge
for Hindus who feel victimized in and by India. This powerful notion of
victimhood among Hindus in the country is not new.

For years, activists milked the monopoly that minorities had over this
rich political resource that victimhood is. Now, across the world, the
socially dominant, which include racial majorities and men, have adopted
the techniques of the weak.

In Nithyananda’s Kailaasa, as envisioned by him, there will be an
awakening of “the third eye”, an awakening of the “kundalini”, which is
a reality or a rumour depending on your personality type. It could be an
“inner awakening”of the solitary kind, or the reward for participating
in “satsangs”, which are devotional gatherings and thus a collective
exercise. All these awakenings can be pursued in my 2 sq. km colony in
Gurgaon, Haryana. I live in Kailaasa.

In the real world, madmen who are known as mad are not influential;
madmen who are not known as mad are the only kind of people who are
influential. And they believe that the others are delusional. And they
often substantiate their arguments by invoking our most sacred religion,
science. All this is common between our world and Kailaasa.

In fact, when a Tamilian says, “It can been scientifically proved”, he
usually means something that he knows is true but cannot prove.

About two years ago, a retired cricketer of nationwide fame and acclaim
told a few people in a room where I was present, “I can scientifically
prove in 15 minutes that India is a Hindu country.”

Then the former cricketer said, “I can prove it in 5 minutes, actually.”

Upon some thought, he added, “Or at least you will not be able to
scientifically disprove it.” This was in the authors’ lounge of a
literature festival. It could have been held in Kailaasa.

Nithyananda’s central proposition is that ancient Hinduism had explained
the meaning of life and why there is something instead of nothing, but
the transmission of this explanation had been substandard in modern
times until his arrival.

Nithyananda once said the “crooked non-vegetarian brain” came up with
the equation “E=mc2”. He also said there was no difference between
“energy” and “matter” (which strangely is what Albert Einstein too was
trying to say in his famous equation).

Nithyananda challenges scientific conventions, but he does not
disrespect the idea of science itself. In fact, he appears to venerate
science. He conveys the abstract through scientific language, like most
scholars in the real world do. He said his nation of Kailaasa would
permit entry to life emerging from “all 11 dimensions”. How is this any
more absurd than the most revered scientists today talking confidently
about multi-dimensions?

If you think scientists have proof, beyond mathematical proof, you must
read more. Theoretical physics is one deep Kailaasa.

A world where mystery is glorified, the paranormal is accepted, and
everybody talks about meditation as though they know what it means, and
“belief” is a virtue and not just another word for “delusion”, which it
is.

Is this your residential colony or Kailaasa? Can you tell the
difference?

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
