# A tribute to ‘The Office’ before the Indian version is out

*2019-06-23*

Since it first appeared in 2001, British television series The Office
has delighted millions across the world, including idiot bosses who
think it is about other people.

There are nine versions of the series in seven languages, including its
most famous adaptation, the American version. In a few days the Indian
adaptation of The Office, in Hindi, will release on Hotstar, and I have
finally found the opportunity to pay my respects to a rare British work
that is at once celebrated and actually good.

In the original version, a small-town regional manager of a paper
company, David Brent, played by Ricky Gervais, who is also the
co-creator of the series, takes us through his life. He is a very
familiar man. He is the middle-aged manager, who has no capacity to be
with his own thoughts; who likes to talk and pronounce some words in
festive ways to appear entertaining; who likes to think of himself as
mad; who hedges the risk of speaking his mind by couching it as a joke;
who laughs at his own jokes until laughter itself assumes the form of
sorrow; who requires the comfort of a sidekick and who desperately wants
to be liked by attractive people. David is an amiable lonely man, and
loneliness is never about scarcity of people but a result of wishing for
the company of those who do not want to be with you.

The Office achieves the highest level of humour in moments that are
hilarious because they are very true, and at once, sad for the same
reason. Once, he pranks his secretary by telling her that she is fired,
and he is genuinely surprised when she breaks down. When she realizes it
was a prank, she conveys to him the very substance of what he really is:
“You’re a sad little man.”

There is a streak of evil in this man-child, precisely because he is a
man-child. He reminds us of the possibility that the evil in all humans
is only a residue of qualities that children needed to survive
childhood.

The American version of David Brent is Michael Scott, played by Steve
Carell. David Brent is an authentic provincial male manager, hence a
despicable character, while Michael Scott is primarily stupid, which
makes him more endearing.

Like in any quality work of humour, a part of the brilliance of The
Office is its exploitation of the prevailing cowardice of political
correctness. In one scene, Michael Scott is flirting with an “Asian”
waitress and he discreetly marks her arm with a felt-pen to distinguish
her from another “Asian” waitress. In another scene that is intended to
be comic, an Indian employee named Kelly is caught sabotaging the
internal assessments of two salesmen in her office and, to defend
herself, she tells Michael she was raped by them. Michael tells her:
“You cannot say ‘I was raped’ and expect all of your problems to go
away, Kelly. Not again. Don’t keep doing that.” And, Michael’s sidekick
Dwight, who is carrying on a secret affair with the fiancée of a
colleague, often smiles at us to make fun of the cuckold, making us all
complicit.

Humour, when it works, is always a reward for risk.

The Office takes great risks; as a result it fails, too. For instance,
when Dwight reveals that he hires illegal migrants to work on his farm,
he says that when it is time to pay them he makes his cousin pose as an
immigration and naturalization officer, who takes them away in a van,
drops them in a small town and tells them it is Canada. This moment
fails because we are on the side of the impoverished labourers and the
scene is not brilliant enough to override its cruelty.

The victories and failures of humour say a lot about its audiences. In
the scenes that work, we are all complicit. People discreetly accept
that they, too, cannot tell two “Chinese” waitresses apart; and that
they do believe women play victims to get out of situations; and that
they find something comical about unfaithfulness. But the exploitation
of migrants by Dwight is not as funny because most people, even when no
one is looking, will not make an impoverished migrant do hard manual
labour with the intention of not paying him.

For many years after I watched the British original, I refused to watch
the American version because I had somehow got the impression that
American adaptation was more farcical. But very recently, I decided to
take a chance, and I found that it had preserved the complex hilarious
sorrow of the original.

In a scene I have mentioned earlier, after Kelly is caught sabotaging
two of her colleagues, she reveals that she did it because they had not
attended her party and she was hurt. Michael himself is a man who is
always reaching out, always trying to get people to attend his parties
and is always spurned. He is a man who survives life by not seeing his
circumstances. But sometimes he does see clearly. So, in one of the most
tender moments in the series, he tells her: “I have an enormous amount
of trouble trying to get people to come to my place. And I hate it. I
can’t tell you how much leftover guacamole I have ended up eating over
the years. I don’t even know why I make it in such great quantities.”

But now and then, Michael does find companionship. He even finds love.
“Chemistry”, The Office teaches us, is often a convenient union of two
equal handicaps. In some cases, we are rewarded with love when we are
misunderstood by gorgeous people. Sometimes we get lucky, and all our
guacamole gets eaten.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
