# The prickly question of whether voting is a moral act

*2019-03-18*

**A**few days ago, a radio jockey pranked a man in Mumbai. He posed as a
representative of a travel company and offered a deal on a vacation in
the last week of April. When the man took the bait, the jockey asked him
if he was certain that he wished to go on a vacation on 29 April, which
he soon revealed as the voting day in Mumbai. The jockey then revealed
his true identity and rebuked the man in front of all of Mumbai for his
disregard for the sacred day.

The sanctimonious jockey is part of a large mass of people who venerate
voting. On voting day, there will be thousands of Instagram pictures of
Indians showing their forefingers with the stated or unspoken claim that
they have done something noble. Also, there will certainly be one viral
photograph of a very old bent woman who had travelled a great distance
to vote.

Voting is consecrated in our age, but is voting a moral act?

When people say in public why they vote, they make it seem as though
they vote for virtuous things. But what exactly do they do in the
privacy of the booth? If we look at the history of Indian elections, we
see that the reasons why most Indians voted are these: They had accepted
bribes in the form of money and liquor to vote for dangerous men; they
voted for corrupt men because such characters seemed capable and street
smart; they also voted for the supremacy of their caste and they voted
to harm or restrain other communities and religions. They voted to
defeat suave people though the suave people seemed nice and meant well.
Generally, Indians voted for murderers, rapists and thieves, for the
type of men who have to be herded in buses and hidden in resorts by
their handlers to keep them from been bought like horses by rival
political parties.

The general public, the people who speak of the great virtuous forces
that impel them to vote, have always in private elected some of the
worst human beings that ever lived. On the other hand, by mass
majoritarian will, a man like B.R. Ambedkar, one of the creators of the
Indian Constitution and among the most intelligent and earnest men of
his time, lost elections twice.

Voting is also a response of the people to expensively transmitted lies
and malice. Any speech today by any politician is filled with
misinformation and venom because the strategy works. It is foolish to
blame politicians. You cannot first invent and venerate electoral
democracy and then accuse politicians of being political. Activists and
journalists, too, are political workers who contribute to the lies and
venom. In the end, everybody agrees, most voters will vote under the
influence of diabolic storytelling. How moral then can voting be?

The elite, by their very nature, are few in number but exert a
disproportionate influence on voters by controlling activism and
influencing journalism through which they then transmit gloom and fear.
Their greatest political success is in creating the notion that we are
going through times that are dark, angry and insane, which are intrinsic
qualities of social activists but not the nature of our age or the world
at all. The world is mostly banal and hopeful, until it switches on the
media.

In India, as in most parts of the world, the elite and the masses have
never wished for the same things. For instance, the Nehruvian elite are
afflicted with paranoia over privacy and detest Aadhaar. However, the
vast poor see in Aadhaar, despite its glitches, a transformational
force. The *People’s Archive Of Rural India*, a journal that is devoted
to rural India founded by journalist and activist P. Sainath, recently
lamented how people with leprosy can be a part of Aadhaar. Actually,
there are provisions in the Aadhaar system for those who do not have
fingers, but that is beside the point. Activists who ask how biometrics
will help such people are just searching for a lament. By their own
logic, these activists must question all of electoral democracy because
someone with leprosy will find it very hard to use a voting machine.

The attack on Aadhaar by India’s paranoid socialistic elite almost
succeeded in sabotaging the project. Meanwhile, the new anti-Nehruvian
corporate elite has been pushing the idea that when they get even
richer, some sweet crumbs will fall on the poor, so let’s build sexy
highways instead of giving away loan waivers.

In effect, when an upper-class Indian goes to vote, or when you go to
vote, to be precise, you are probably walking to defeat the will of a
poor person. Take for instance the hypermoral activist, Arundhati Roy,
who stated recently that she prefers “the chaos” of the Mahagathbandhan,
an arrangement of corrupt and inefficient parties, over Prime Minister
Narendra Modi’s stability. What if the fact is that the Bharatiya Janata
Party’s stability is more beneficial to the urban poor than “the chaos”
that Roy truly prefers? She may not require the government, or political
stability, to continue to thrive, but the poor do. Imagine the moment
when Roy or Sainath cast their vote. They will likely be performing,
however futile, an act that is intended to defeat the will of those who
are poorer than them. What can be more amoral than the upper class going
to vote?

There is one great virtue in voting. Consciously or subconsciously,
people take responsibility for the miseries of their nation. After all,
they had elected inefficient and corrupt people. Hence the probability
of violent revolutions in an electoral democracy is small. However, that
is not why people vote. They do not vote to own up their mistakes. They
vote because their foes have a vote.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist,most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.*
