# The other difficult things Modi should make us all do

*2019-09-15*

Reforming India is harmful for the reformer, and professional
politicians usually never try it. M.G. Ramachandran (MGR) was so popular
as chief minister of Tamil Nadu that Tamil men wept upon seeing him, as
though they had lost a lunar lander, but he never did anything to reform
them. Rather, he only appeased them; he made it legal for them to sit on
the front crossbar of a bicycle, which was an offence until then. In
response, Tamilians rejoiced on the streets. If only MGR had known the
value of pi, he would have changed it from 3.14159…to just 3 to make it
easier to measure a circle. But Prime Minister Narendra Modi is a
different sort of leader. He has made cash vanish for several days; he
has asked Indians to pay their taxes, exercise, eat less, and now his
government has increased fines for traffic violations by many times.
Yet, he thrives. Modi is so popular that he could help us accomplish
some more difficult tasks. Here is a short list

• Most Indian buildings have double gates, as in a pair of gates that
open or shut together. But Indians like to keep one of the gates shut.
Forever. It’s a mystery why they do that. Shutting one of the gates
makes vehicles squeeze through a narrow space for no good reason. As it
is, half this nation is an ad for K-Y Jelly. Why should Indian life be a
squeeze through narrow passageways?

• Female yoga instructors have to be sensitized to say things that men
can understand. A typical yoga teacher will say something like this:
“Imagine a string running through you, from your head and leaving your
tail bone and is tied to that tree out there, which is now pulling you
gentle…” This, while I lie there, the laggard of the class, hoping for a
more equal world.

• Also, as Fit India is a government movement now, I propose that in all
airports, the system of check-in baggage allowance be replaced with
passenger weight plus baggage allowance. It is unfair that light people
and heavy people should have the same baggage allowance when the luggage
travels in the same plane as passengers (most of the time).

• And, gyms should be banned from playing music, as the only kind of
songs they play are for an age group that does not go to the gym in any
case. Recently, as I was trembling with an enormous weight over me, I
heard a man’s voice sing: “I am sleeping like a sleeping maann”. Then a
woman sang, “He has all I need but I don’t need it now.” Who are these
people? What’s going on?

• People who take part in “marathons” only to walk all the way should be
banned from the activity. They are a nuisance who block the way of more
honest runners, all of it only to put up posts on social media. What
validation do they need? Applause for walking? Some of them run only
when their like-minded but amiably daft friend is taking a picture.

• Modi should consider mentioning in one of his speeches something most
Indians do not know: The lift might be socially inferior to you, but
still when you are waiting for a lift, you don’t ask it to come to you;
you tell the lift where you want to go. You press the down arrow when
you want to go down. And, when you want to go up, you press the up
arrow. Do not press the down button, look up, and then push the up
button.

• The MeToo movement should include naming and shaming men who perform
the “naagin” dance at office parties.

• All Indians who invite people over for dinner should be, by law, made
to serve dinner by 9pm at the latest.

• Indians should be weaned off their love for squeezing broke farm
workers into paramilitary outfits and making them do meaningless
tasks—like making cars go zig-zag and pretending to check their boots
with their X-ray vision. Also, Modi should ask all Indians to stop
saluting other Indians, especially the kind of saluting that involves
stomping one leg. And, until the time saluting is banned, all guards
should salute memsaabs, too.

• Business class passengers who are seated in their comfortable seats on
aeroplanes should not be allowed to meet the eyes of economy passengers
as the cattle class shuffles in.

• A person who bums a cigarette should not be expected to have a
conversation with the donor just because a favour was done.

• In any political gathering, all chairs on the stage should be of the
same size. And, once the event begins, no sidekick should be allowed to
crawl on to the stage to whisper into a leader’s ears. This whispering
by the sidekick on stage has been going on from the time of Mahatma
Gandhi. What is it that the sidekicks say, exactly? What is it that
cannot wait? When Apple CEO Tim Cook is on stage, do you see anyone
tip-toeing to him and whispering something?

Actually, what is going on is that the sidekick is sharing the
spotlight, showing his face, and thus conveying to all that he has the
leader’s ear.

• Modi should ask North Indians to decide whether they want to touch an
elder’s feet or not. This ambiguous, in-between act where they reach for
the elder’s crotch instead of his feet should stop. Perhaps they should
learn from South Indians. There exist instructional videos of men
falling at the feet of the late J. Jayalalithaa—lie on belly in full
stretch, and don’t move for many seconds.

• Indian cricketers should not open restaurants that the Indian hockey
team cannot afford.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
