# India’s devout Muslims show our assumptions are wrong

*2019-03-03*

Some honest tributes can be great insults. As in the case of an old
compliment that has come to haunt Indian Muslims in this season of
terror and mojo.

The tribute is often conveyed as a gracious question: Considering the
apparent power of Islam to convert some people into terrorists, “why are
Indian Muslims not radicalized?’’ Among the people who answer the
question for us are acclaimed scholars, diplomats, politicians, writers
and journalists. Their answers are wrong. The question itself is
foolish. But the foolishness of the question is not the reason why the
answers are wrong.

Most of India’s 180 million Muslims are poor, semi-literate, driven into
ghettos and very devout, conditions in which global scholars have
claimed Muslims demonstrate dangerous properties.

How many people per million in a community have to join a terror group
for that society to be deemed ‘‘radicalized’’? There is, of course, no
helpful global standard, but the consensus among scholars, diplomats and
politicians is that India’s Muslims are not “radicalized”.

Very few Indian Muslims outside Kashmir have been involved in acts of
terror. In the glory days of Al Qaeda, the terror network failed to draw
in Indians. A confidential report prepared in 2015 by the intelligence
agencies of several nations suggested that even the Islamic State
thought Indian Muslims were lousy at terror, especially in the total
commitment and suicide-bombing departments. In the first place, Islamic
State could lure very few Indians. Various reports on the number of
Indians who joined ISIS agree that the figure is in the region of 100.

India is this way, according to David Heyman, a former US assistant
secretary for homeland security, because “India was born a
multicultural, multi-ethnic, multi-denominational society that embraces
that diversity”. This is a common view among scholars who bloviate on
the subject. “India has been a model of inclusiveness,” the US
ambassador to India then, Richard Verma, told journalists when asked why
few Indian Muslims have joined the Islamic State.

If an Indian Muslim laughs at all this, it is because of his
circumstances. He has memories of riots, and those whom he regards as
perpetrators have grown in political stature. After the recent
escalation of India-Pakistan tensions, a Muslim mother tweeted that her
two children are being asked by their schoolmates to go “back to
Pakistan”.

Even before the recent tensions, every now and then, a politician or
government official would ask Muslims who are unhappy with India to “go
to Pakistan”. In the past few weeks, Indian Muslims burned Pakistani
flags, a show of patriotism Hindus do not have to perform.

About 20 years ago, I had gone around the posh parts of south Mumbai,
claiming to be “Mohammed Khan’’ from Kerala looking to pay an atrocious
rent for a flat but every time a Hindu landlord would learn of my name,
his demeanour would change and, of course, the deal would fall through.

The idea that India is ‘’inclusive’’ is promoted by people who are never
in a position to know how India excludes. The pious nonsense of India
being “multicultural, multi-ethnic…” cannot be the reason why Indian
Muslims “are not radicalized”.

What then could be the reason? Scholars and visiting diplomats do point
to the fact that Indian Muslims are lucky to be in a democracy, and
‘‘have a voice’’. However, the Muslim representation in politics has
been declining. The current Lok Sabha has the lowest Muslim
representation since 1957.

Over the years, since the rise of Al Qaeda, several explanations for the
moderateness of Indian Muslims have leaned on the fact that the
prosperity of the nation in the past two decades has deepened the sense
of Indian identity among Muslims. This is not a spurious reason, but
there is much that it does not explain. How, for instance, have Muslims
remained moderate in the face of politically profitable religious
violence and social insults, and the stagnation of Muslims in poverty
even as other communities have done better.

India’s politicians take credit for the innocuous nature of the average
Indian Muslim as though they have put in place some cunning intelligence
network. What India does not have the heart to state is that it is safe
not because of some grand sophisticated spy shield but because the
nation’s first line of defence is made up of ordinary Muslims. At the
first sign of suspicious outsiders or activities, the local Muslims
alert the police. India has faced very few terror attacks, not in spite
of its Muslims but because of them.

The reason why the question ‘‘why are Indian Muslims not violently
radicalized?’’ is daft is in the surprise implied in the question. It
makes an assumption that Muslims in certain conditions will turn
violent—that the poor and the illiterate are innately more prone to
violence than highly educated scholars. What India’s devout Muslims show
is that this assumption is wrong. What they show is that most of
humanity, no matter what its disenchantments and provocations, does not
wish to kill.

I propose a new assumption. What if religious terrorism, like extreme
activism, is a symbiosis of handlers and the miserable, which includes
the mentally ill? If this assumption is a fact, we can ask why is it
that in some regions of the world, sadists and psychopaths are able to
recruit the vulnerable. That, I believe, is the correct question. Not
“why 180 million human beings are so human in India’’.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist,most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.*
