# Greta Thunberg and Bill Gates aren’t on the same side

*2019-09-27*

Over the past few days, many of us paid attention to two people who have
the same goal. One is a loveable 16-year-old Swedish girl who believes
the world is going to end, for which she holds capitalism responsible;
and the other is a billionaire whose wealth equals about one-fifth of
Sweden’s gross domestic product (GDP). Greta Thunberg has become the
mascot of climate-alarm; Bill Gates is a hero from another time, once a
mascot of much happier things, and “the only person on this earth who
I’ve never heard complain about his wife”, a baffled man says in the new
documentary, Inside Bill’s Brain, that was released on Netflix a few
days ago.

Thunberg attracts people who are susceptible to believing any bleak and
calamitous prognosis of the world. Gates is admired by prospering
optimists who would admire any man who is worth $100 billion, and as a
trade-off even listen to him talk about sanitation in poor nations.

Thunberg is particularly endearing to women, many of whom consider the
girl’s critics “middle-aged men”, which is somehow a descriptive insult
today. Several female commentators have used the language of psychiatry
when they talk about men who hate Thunberg: “Why does she trigger men?”
they ask. On social media, young women are representing Thunberg’s
critics through a common meme that young women use to insult middle-aged
men: A scene from Game Of Thrones in which a young woman is saying:
“Uncle, please sit.” It’s a perplexing choice of meme, as it is from a
series where “uncles” are no pushovers. Rather, they appear to get a lot
of sex from young women.

Thunberg, for no fault of hers, has been co-opted and deified by the
climate-alarm industry, which, like all of activism, believes that a bit
of drama and exaggeration are absolutely justified for a great moral
cause. Recently, a video of Thunberg staring at Trump became popular,
with every share goading people to believe that she was giving him a
dirty look. And people began to see exactly that, just as some people
can be influenced to see human faces on Mars.

Gates is particularly endearing to men who imagine they have arrived at
their beliefs by considering “all the facts” and through “logical
reasoning”. They see in Gates a strategic, masculine solver of the
problems of a weak, miserable world, all along aided by an appreciative
wife.

Thunberg has Asperger’s syndrome and, through her, everyone in the world
who feels vulnerable is reassured by activism, which is after all a flea
market of human frailties. Inside Bill’s Brain, on the other hand,
reaffirms the great strengths of a billionaire who can read 150 pages of
a dense book in an hour “with 90% retention”, as a man says, though
there is no way he can know what percentage Gates retains of his
reading.

“How dare you!” Thunberg recently said to the adults who run the world.
“You have stolen my dreams and my childhood with your empty words.”
Human suffering, Gates says calmly in the documentary, as though with no
emotion, “is a resource-constraint problem”.

Despite the differences between Thunberg and Gates, people are led to
believe that they are on the same side in the war to control the
climate. After all, they share the same goal. But then, goals are often
glorified masks of methods. Our fiercest battles have never been over
goals, but over methods. All religions and ideologies, and professors
who are not sadists, have the same stated goal, which is the welfare of
people, but they have fought for centuries over methods.

We care more for our methods than about the world.

Gates, whose foundation spends more money on health than the World
Health Organization, is disliked by career activists who generally hate
billionaire philanthropists seen to be encroaching on their precious
turf and even, preposterously, trying to solve problems using science
and corporate methods.

As a businessman, Gates is trained to be practical. A few days ago, he
gave an award to Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and a
self-righteous member of the foundation quit in protest. But from the
point of view of Gates, it is a good idea to honour Modi.

Also, Gates has the freedom to seek solutions for climate change in
nuclear power, which is among the cleanest fuels. The foundational
design of a civilian nuclear reactor that he is developing was laid out
by two men, one of whom was Edward Teller, also known as “the father of
the hydrogen bomb”.

It’s likely that if Greta Thunberg even suggests that nuclear power is a
way to end climate change, she will suffer for it because such an idea
is repulsive to the sort of people who have canonized her. An activist
can only speak truth to people who really don’t matter to her—like heads
of state. If she crosses humanitarians and some editors, her aura will
fade.

In the future, she might be among the many powerful humanitarians who
stand in the way of Bill Gates. The toughest part of Gates’ pursuit is
not a quest for the kind of science that will end human miseries; it is
battling reformers who have different ideas from him.

“Sometimes, you really have to say: Let’s give up,” he says towards the
end of Inside Bill’s Brain. “Sometimes, you have to just say: I need to
work harder.”
