# The clarity with which atheists should view believers

*2020-08-09*

Almost every atheist has said this at least once, “But I believe in a
force.” Some of them have since downgraded truth as far less
exciting—that life and the universe have no point, no meaning. Some
atheists feel, even when they have not ingested any substance, that
living things are “interconnected”. Others say something in the base of
your spine can “awaken”. What is common to the whole spectrum of
atheists is that they tend to look down upon believers in God. They deny
the magic of divinity.

Last week, when ground was broken for a shrine to Ram in Ayodhya, people
who consider themselves rationalists once again condemned believers as
delusional and irrational. But this is a useless way to see most of
humanity. How then must they perceive believers?

There are rational explanations for God. As an ancient fable that has
been taken too seriously, as a contagious delusion from a long time ago,
as a misunderstanding of dramatic natural phenomena. All these miss the
most important attribute of God—success. God has endured. Across the
millennia, innumerable gods have vanished, but the ones that survived
are only evolutions of older gods. Dismissing a force so ancient, one
that has endured, is an expensive mistake that India’s modern
intellectuals committed after Independence.

They were deluded by an impractical modern political idea—secularism.
Imagine someone trying to sell a subscription to an orphanage; that is
what secularism is from a cultural point of view. The dismissal of Hindu
discontent in the name of modernity resulted in the political
annihilation of those associated with that insult, and the present
miseries of Muslims.

There is something sad about the consecration of a Hindu temple on a
site where a mosque stood for centuries and was then demolished by a
mob. The Supreme Court of India was supposed to be a creation of
modernity and rationality but, in the end, one of its most influential
verdicts, granting the disputed site in Ayodhya to Hindus, seemed like
an emotional act. And there is a message that the temple’s construction
may send: modernity, too, is a fable like religion, and the
overestimation of modernity will always be punished by the past.

The more we insult the past in the name of the future, the more
territory the present will have to concede to the past. The future is
merely a hope of a better age and better humans; the past, on the other
hand, is a vast body of evidence of what humans really are, and what
truly matters to us. That, in my view, is what God is. An insight from
history into human nature.

The sound of prayers and even the physical actions of rituals are from a
very ancient time, when the present gods were other gods and present
faiths existed in other forms. This is a matter of pure heritage. How
then can modern folk, who so claim to love heritage, lament God? The
true heritage of a place is rarely what global intellectuals nag us
about. The real culture of a place is what does not require nagging and
lament—like local food, music, practical garments, rituals and God.

Those who are hurt by a scratch on an ancient monument are often the
type who constantly disfigure ancient myths. For instance, the almost
annual feminist rewriting of Sita as a more independent woman. Sita
shows us the preoccupations of another time, just as Agatha Christie’s
depictions of Africans were a reflection of her times. Should heritage
only be what is good about our ancestors that modern atheists approve
of? From a literary point of view, it is pointless to convert a figure
like Sita into an unremarkable fictitious modern person.

In this light, believers are our true conservationists. They resist the
sanctimonious marauders who try to demolish their faith in order to
build a shrine to modernity.

From the antiquity of God, we know the central principles of human
story-telling that will endure. That if you want to tell a great story,
there can be conflicts and grey characters, but in the end, good has to
triumph.

The fact that humans tend to believe in the paranormal should ideally
make the so-called rationalist ask, “Am I a believer too, and if so, who
is my Ram?”

There have always been two kinds of believers. Those who believe in God,
and atheists. Some of the most influential scientists of Western
civilization were great believers in God, like Isaac Newton, or strongly
suspected there was some kind of God, like Charles Darwin. And there
were many scientists who said there was no God but were deeply
influenced by the magic realism of divine fables. It is not a
coincidence that the Big Bang theory can be summarized by one the most
famous opening lines of a story ever: “In the beginning was the word…”

The origin of scientific inquiry lies either in religion or in a revolt
against it. In fact, science itself has become religion. It has all the
crucial attributes—an abstraction explains a mystery, a handful of
people fully understand the medium in which the explanation is
delivered, they evangelize, people believe, and the infidels are
ostracized. Can’t we see this quality in theories of the Big Bang,
quantum mechanics and climate change?

Despite our claims of “logical thinking”, we have not arrived at our
present beliefs after a process of deep honest debate in our heads. We
believe first, and then find evidence. We are all believers. Clarity is
simply knowing who is our Ram.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
