# It’s important not to let idealists put you off idealism

*2020-01-19*

You might be one of them. When events push you to take a moralistic
position, say, about equality, religion or climate, you see the faces of
some idealists and you do not wish to be idealistic anymore. You search
for the other point of view. Many are this way. This phenomenon is at
the heart of why the world votes the way it does and acts in a way that
is the exact opposite of what intellectuals say people should do. Many
ordinary people who appear to be “right-wing” are so because they hate
that one leftist, maybe two. Sometimes, idealists actually do make
sense, but the worst thing they do to sense itself is being its
evangelists. Can it be that the world would have been far more
idealistic if there were no idealists?

A few days ago, the teenage climate-change activist Greta Thunberg
admonished tennis legend Roger Federer for endorsing the
Switzerland-based investment bank Credit Suisse, which she has accused
of funding the exploration of fossil fuels. There is something about all
this that annoys you. You love the world, but hate the self-righteous.
You cannot be on the same side as such people. You want to build an
argument against them. These are young beneficiaries of capitalist
societies that, until recently, plundered the world—you want to
say—people who have everything, hence have lifestyles that account for
much more pollution than an Indian who has never heard of
“climate-change”, and are now searching for some meaning to their lives.
But this argument, you know, is dull.

Meanwhile, the future employees of Credit Suisse and other banks, the
ones who will write the fine print on the contracts that drive
capitalism, too, have found their own safe moral outrage. Last November,
when the Consul General of Israel in New York, Dani Dayan, was about to
begin delivering a talk at Harvard Law School, about a hundred students,
more than half his audience, walked out in a planned act of flash
posturing against Israel.

You don’t want to have the same sham views as these people. You despise
those who inherited their wealth and write long essays lamenting
inequality; you are tired of slighted academics getting back at the
government through righteous attacks on its policies; and of the
clinically depressed who see a world as bleak as their own lives. You
can see what these people believe—that they are somehow morally superior
to you because they feel beautiful feelings.

What must you do? The ambassadors of giant ideals are often moral
midgets. So, what must you do? Maybe it is time you do not let idealists
put you off idealism.

Idealism should be ingested very differently by the intelligent, the
wise, the analytical, the old, the honest, the non-sentimental, the
happy, the strong and the sane.

One way of looking at our ideals is not as grand virtues alone, but
chiefly as ideas that have survived and endured. Generations of humans
across societies have naturally selected those ideas to endure. Even the
ideals that govern the new idealism of climate change are very old. One
could argue that the climate change movement is not about climate at
all—it is about misanthropy, it is about contempt for humans. Some of
our most powerful guiding philosophies against consumption and excesses,
and all forms of gluttony, have emerged from the contempt for our race
that holds within its contempt the conviction that there is an ideal
state of being. Organized misanthropy has always been a minority’s
contempt for the majority. The climate change movement is exactly that.

This is how we must see modern idealism, as a complex result of ancient
ideas that have had excellent reasons to survive and against which all
resistance will be futile.

Another irritant you may have is the realization that most idealists are
self-serving. But then selfishness is the most effective way to
propagate idealism.

After madness, the best conductor of an idea is self-interest. Without
the force of self-interest, good will not be able to fight evil. For
instance, the only way the greed of capitalism can be countered is
through other forms of self-interests, like the battle of the losers of
capitalism against those who are richer than them.

Also, people who are innately good but despise idealism because they
despise idealists can save themselves from poor arguments if they just
surrender to the power of collective human virtues. Recently, I read an
argument that if Indians are allowed to degrade their ecology and
prosper, they will eventually become rich enough to care for nature.
This sort of nonsense captivates you, not because you hate the idealism
of caring for the natural environmental, but the circus of idealists.

You may also consider idealism as heritage. It may have some trappings
of modernity, but idealism bears a closer similarity to tradition.

Many traditions have vanished or are vanishing, and are kept alive
artificially. Languages and dialects, for instance, that have lost their
utility over the years; or dances that are too dreary for anyone. The
real heritage of a place is what its cultural middlemen do not have to
work hard to conserve—for instance, cuisine and daily wear. The ideals
that have survived have the same momentum of time as traditions that
have survived. A way to look upon idealists is not as prophets, but as
zombies in the trace of a great power they do not fully fathom. So why
let zombies come in the way of experiencing an old moral force, which is
what idealism is?

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
