# Sacha Baron Cohen is the greatest prankster of our age

*2020-10-25*

In Borat Subsequent Moviefilm, a Kazakh prisoner enters the US to
deliver a monkey to the American vice-president as a bribe. It is a film
that is filled with reality.

In a “true story”, what is often true is a trivial thing called a plot,
while it is filled with dramatized facts or lies; but in a great comedy,
the plot may have never happened, but for it to work, it depends on
reality, unlike easier things like films that are not funny.

This film is a sequel to the exquisite Borat: Cultural Learnings of
America for Make Benefit Glorious Nation of Kazakhstan in which a man
called Borat, played by Sacha Baron Cohen, pranked unsuspecting
Americans. He went to the American heartland, stood in front of a huge
rodeo crowd, praised president George W. Bush, the Iraq war, and sang
what he claimed was the Kazakh national anthem to the tune of the
American anthem. “Kazakstan is the greatest country in the world…,” he
went, as the crowd grew restive. He even interviewed three women of the
Veteran Feminists of America, assuming one of them was “an old man”.

I will not reveal much from the Subsequent Moviefilm beyond the fact
that it further establishes Cohen as probably the greatest prankster of
our times. He is an improbable prankster because he has all the
trappings of an elegant bore. He is a handsome British aristocrat, who
went to Cambridge; in short, he has the right antecedents to become a
sanctimonious writer-activist. But then, that is what he is, and his
greatness lies in the medium he has chosen—the comedy of real and fake
pranks.

Pranks, when real, are closer to anthropology than most things that
claim to be anthropology. In a prank, people react to a situation in
ways that reveal a lot about their society and times. In Cohen’s Who Is
America, a television series that appeared two years ago, he poses as a
former Mossad agent and convinces an actual Republican member of the
Georgia House of Representatives that ISIS terrorists are petrified of
homosexuality and that their culture deemed them gay if a man’s buttocks
touched them, so the best way for a man to defend himself against an
ISIS terrorist is to run backward with a pouted rear-end towards the
terrorist. The politician does exactly that in a drill as he charges at
Cohen, who plays the role of a terrorist. But Cohen is not satisfied and
he convinces the politician that he has to bare himself, and, as he
charges backwards, scream “USA, USA.” Incredibly, the politician does
that. The fake ex-Mossad agent also convinces former US Vice-President
Dick Cheney to autograph a water bottle as a tribute to waterboarding, a
form of torture that Cheney is accused of sanctioning.

In Who Is America, Cohen pranks Democrats, too, by posing as a
handicapped interviewer to win their sympathy and time. In an interview
with Bernie Sanders, he argues with him that Democrats should stop
whining about the top one percent and instead include the other 99% in
the top one percent, and proceeds to show how the math can be done as
Sanders looks perplexed.

In an age when most documentaries, like The Social Dilemma, are
propaganda masquerading as journalism, and the moral compass of
literature has been taken over by posturing simpletons, Cohen’s pranks
surpass them as anthropology, journalism and art, even as they make you
laugh so hard that you fear your stomach will explode.

There is greatness in Cohen, not only as a prankster, but as an artist.
He is, of course, protected by the great constitution of the US that
lends him an exceptional degree of free speech and legal protection.
Even so, he is courageous in doing what he does, because many of his
pranks carry the risk of impulsive physical retribution. But his courage
is most significant in his innate ability to debase himself: Few would
dare parade themselves in a thong that even other thongs would find
funny.

He is evidently a man who is not shy. In a certain sense, he is a
perfectly shameless man. The shy are shy because they are so judgmental
that they fear others may be as severe in their opinion of them as they
are of others. So people who are incapable of shame are probably those
who not only speak of freedom, but also grant others the freedom to be
themselves.

Like any comedian of high quality, Cohen considers it his duty to make
fun of all that is sacred. And powerful men, whom he does lampoon
without mercy, are not as sacred as the entire spectrum of the unlucky.
The poor and the handicapped, for instance. There is a common view among
the pious of our times, the social minders who often tell us how to be,
that making fun of the weak is not humour. But they miss the whole
point. When a comedian derives humour from the miserable, he is not
making fun of them; rather, he is making fun of the serious, noble
people who will be offended.

Cohen often does slip into mediocrity, chiefly the ordinariness of
sarcasm, a facile form of humour in which you say the opposite of what
you mean to say. And many of Cohen’s pranks are not really pranks, but
set-pieces played by paid actors, and it is somewhat crooked of him not
to tell us which one is a real prank and which is mere cinema. Most of
what he does is funny only because we presume they are real pranks.

Despite all that, Cohen is worthy of the world’s adoration. There is no
doubt that he performs a very tough art—he tells us a story that is not
about us at all, and despite our megalomania, we watch in a near trance.
But his greatest gift perhaps is that when he is out pranking someone,
he never laughs.
