# What the coronavirus crisis reveals of human nature

*2020-03-15*

A few months ago, Venkatraman Ramakrishnan, a winner of the Nobel Prize
in chemistry, explained to me the relationship between sex and death.
Nature gifted us sex to “shuffle the card deck of genes” and see which
combination thrives. But the lottery of life also requires the elderly
to stop competing, “to somewhat get out of the way”. Thus, death is the
price we pay for sex.

But then, “Californian billionaires are having such a good time at the
party of life that they don’t want it to stop.” So, they are investing
billions of dollars in solving the problem of mortality. But this is not
their most interesting reaction to death.

When news of the coronavirus disease broke, American tech billionaires
were the most influential transmitters of its seriousness, and of the
deceptive speed of any exponential growth. If it were not for them, most
governments would have done far worse than their current miserable
performance.

Usually, tech billionaires overreact to danger. There is a reason why
they speak so much about artificial intelligence and machines taking
over the world. Human beings tend to have an inherent need to be
oppressed, to a reasonable extent. Resisting this oppression then
becomes the primary preoccupation of life. But tech billionaires are not
oppressed by anything human, so they see their oppressors in intelligent
machines. And, of course, in lethal viruses and death.

In this way, the pandemic that is underway, which has brought the world
to a near-standstill, reveals aspects of human nature that usually lurk
beneath the complex surface of normal life.

In reacting to the pandemic, especially in its early days, people
appeared to have a plan, but they were only being true to their
personalities. Alpha paranoids infected their paranoid followers, and
alpha optimists infected theirs. Usually, optimists make sense, but in
response to the pandemic, it turns out the paranoid were right, and the
optimists have looked silly.

But, often what appears to be personality is a hierarchy of underlying
interests. Elon Musk, usually among the tech billionaires who overreact
to any news of human doom, was as optimistic as old-world businessmen
like Donald Trump. “The coronavirus panic is dumb,” Musk tweeted on 7
March. Paul Graham, the co-founder of Y-Combinator replied: “With
exponential functions you want to err on the side of caution.”

Musk’s uncharacteristic optimism could have been because he wanted the
recent high momentum of Tesla, and hell for an army of Tesla stock
short-sellers, to continue. At a time when his usual paranoia would have
helped him anticipate the spread of a disease, he was misled by hope.

A defining quality of our age is that leaders of the modern world in
every field—business, politics, science and arts—are constantly
imparting their analyses. Millions follow these leaders to make sense of
our age. Yet, these leaders are often wrong. Whole nations got it wrong.

The most naive analysis that scores of nations made was assuming that
only some countries were affected by the virus, hence proceeding to test
only people arriving from there—just four even in late February. It did
not occur to the most influential people in the world that most
countries appeared free of Covid-19 simply because they were not testing
for the disease. India banning people from China and Italy, but allowing
the rest of the world to enter, reminded me of people who were concerned
about the pesticide content in colas as though the rest of the sugary
drink was healthy to consume.

In all the noise emanating from the world, there is a whisper that I
find most interesting. It comes from some respectable nooks of Western
civilization, and the whispers carry dissent against the very idea of
democracy, and praise for autocracies.

A spectrum of democracy’s devouts have praised China and Singapore for
their tough response to the disease, a level of astonishing efficiency
that was attainable only to such undemocratic political systems. British
economist Jim O’Neill said, correctly: “Thank God this didn’t start in
somewhere like India, because there’s absolutely no way that the quality
of Indian governance could move to react in the way that the Chinese
have done, that’s the good side of the Chinese model…”

The US and Britain, too, have responded to the crisis poorly, or that is
what people whose stories reach us are saying.

The emerging voice that we can hear from Western intellectuals is
appreciation for the efficiency of a powerful state that is not
answerable to a cacophony of activists, and that there is something
obsolete and foolish about the chaos of democracy, its bleak dissenters
and the notion of individual liberty that come in the way of swift
solutions.

This message isn’t new. Ever since Trump and Brexit, there have been
grumblings about democracy from some of its influential evangelists.
Democracy, they mutter, has become too democratic. If professors and
award-winning journalists cannot influence the masses, what will become
of the free world? Look at how the US is run today.

The taunt itself is not as interesting as the psychological medium
through which it travels. In what China and Singapore have done to
contain Covid-19, people can see a humanitarian triumph even as global
distributors of halos are withdrawing the auras from the US, Britain and
Europe.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
