# Why it doesn’t matter that humans are basically good

*2020-07-12*

Were there lovers in prehistoric times? And did fathers put their little
girls on their shoulders to show them things far away? If early men were
so barbaric, as nicer men now claim, how did women and children survive
the epochs? Were the weak always the slaves of stronger men? If sati was
as prevalent in India as historians claim, why weren’t all widows burned
on the pyres of their husbands? Did millions of Indians, even as
recently as the 18th century, simply accept that their girls could be
burnt alive? Or, was sati merely a rare anomaly that some Colonials
charlatans magnified? Why do you think people in olden days did not have
the same feelings that you have?

Are humans innately good, or are they drawn to cruelty if they can get
away? Why is there love, community, altruism, sacrifice and modern
Scandinavia?

You know that there are scholarly answers to these questions, most of
which emerge from what I suspect is the most spurious part of
science—anthropology. These days, when I hear “hunter-gatherer”, or “our
tribal instincts”, I know some nonsense is coming. The most influential
and popular answer for decades has been that if humans had complete
freedom to do what they wanted, there would be mayhem and barbarity.

But in an almost persuasive book, *Humankind: A Hopeful History*, the
Dutch historian Rutger Bregman tries to dismantle this notion. He argues
that people will instead coexist in great harmony. “We had evolved to
gather berries and chill out.”

If you are tired of Caucasians telling us what we have evolved to do,
the book is absorbing for its demolition of what other Caucasians have
been telling us we have evolved to do. In the process, Bregman exposes
as farce some of the most celebrated “historical accounts” of human
cruelty, often involving tribals on remote islands eating each other, or
at least slaughtering. He also brings up a famous experiment of 1971 in
a Stanford University basement. Readers of popular anthropology may have
quoted this experiment to their friends to hold forth on the barbaric
instinct of humans. In that experiment, a psychologist named Philip
Zimbardo hired volunteers to assume roles of prison guards and
prisoners. After a few days, Zimbardo claimed, the “guards” had become
monsters even though the whole exercise was play-acting. The world was
fascinated by yet another reminder that humans are drawn to barbarity.
But Bregman says that the experiment was “a hoax”. Most “guards” had
refused to play sadistic games with their “prisoners”, and many in fact
treated the captives with kindness. The few “guards” who had behaved
poorly had been tutored and coerced by Zimbardo to act in that manner.

In the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863, during the American Civil War,
records show that most soldiers refused to fire at other humans, or only
pretended to. They kept loading their already loaded guns with
ammunition to satisfy their superiors. Bregman relishes this fact. Also
that, “In the US Air Force, less than 1% of fighter pilots were
responsible for almost 40% of the planes brought down.”

All this gives Bregman the confidence to posit that in the history of
war, soldiers may have killed far less than people think.

In demolishing many of the famous experiments and theories of
anthropologists as well as historians who had earlier argued that humans
were innately barbarians, Bregman inevitably assails or at least
embarrasses popular figures like Jared Diamond, Steven Pinker, Malcolm
Gladwell, Richard Dawkins, and literary works like William Golding’s
Lord of the Flies.

It appears that there is much rubbish about human nature peddled by
three vaunted fields of human intellect—anthropology, psychology and
literature.

It’s not that Bregman himself doesn’t bring in “hunter-gatherers”. He
does, a lot. He argues that Neanderthals were smarter than Homo sapiens,
but were doomed because they were not nice or social enough to transmit
great ideas among themselves the way sapiens could. Human intelligence,
he says, was a “coincidental by-product of friendliness”.

Even though I feel only someone from a rich nation can offer such a
naive assessment, I do not think an idea is flawed just because it is
naive. If, far back, all our tribes were a bit like Holland, a modern
Dutchman will be in a good position to see this more clearly than a
present-day Indian or Iraqi. So, I have no quarrel with his hypothesis
that we are fundamentally, inescapably and helplessly good. But I think
it does not matter.

Most people might be good, sort of. But it does not matter because evil
needs just a few to triumph. Over a billion Indians can be hardwired to
be good, but it takes just a few dozen to commit unspeakable acts of
cruelty. That is why people lean towards rules and order and
civilization—to be protected from a handful of dangerous characters

Bregman’s explanation of most evil is that it is an aberration, a rare
anomaly. He is right, but that is enough to alter the world. That is the
power that the abnormal has over the normal, and that is the reason
abnormality has survived in a species that otherwise has so much love
and joy in its heart.

Also, the strongmen of the modern world are not islands of authority who
have usurped power by force. Rather, they are powerful because they
reflect the sentiments of large numbers. So, most humans may not be
barbarians, but they often outsource evil to one who might be.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
