# The art of survival in a world of unknowing zombies

*2020-09-13*

I am writing a zombie movie. No, it is not about the sort of people who
watch TV news. I am not being satirical or metaphorical. I really am
writing a zombie movie. And I thought, this week, instead of commenting
on whatever is going on in the world, why don’t I just let you in on my
zombie movie?

I must admit that I am a bit influenced by topical events, but come on,
every story is influenced by reality. That much concession you have to
extend to me. So, in my zombie movie, you might notice that there is the
influence of corona, and the mysterious Indian stamina for totally
useless issues that will never improve their lives.

The hero is, of course, you. Why are you so surprised? I’m not making
fun of you. It really is you. Hasn’t it occurred to you that the hero in
every story is always you? The aspiration of every film is that you
identify with one of the main characters. If you don’t, the story is
either doomed or acclaimed by six scholars, which is the same as doomed.
That is the corruption at the heart of every story, and that is why
every story ever told is familiar—it is all about you and your moral
self-absorption.

So what happens in the zombie movie is that one day you begin to notice
that everyone around you is beginning to behave in a strange manner.
They appear to become obsessed with something that sounds like news but
has no relevance to their lives. For example: “Rhea killed her
boyfriend”, or “Trump is a fascist”. Even though they appear passionate
about it, they can only describe it in one line. They have nothing more
to say. They hold forth for hours, but in reality they just repeat that
same one line. It is a bit like how most people know only a paragraph
about stuff outside their domains.

This is a global zombie story, but Indian characters have a unique
quality—like the rest of the world, they chant one line of news every
day but in at least three languages because Indian zombies are
multilingual.

You, the hero, set out to find out what has happened to the world. And
you learn the startling fact that there is this virus that is
transmitted from phone screens and other monitors, and even paper and
all other sources of information. It gets lodged in a receiver’s brain
and takes over all expression. Different people are taken over by
different lines, as every individual is susceptible to a particular
mutation of this ancient virus. Your dad has become a right-wing zombie,
your mom has become a religious zombie; your smartest friends, who
appear normal in the first minutes of conversation, have become woke
zombies; your aunt has become a conspiracy-theory zombie. The virus has
been transmitted for centuries in this manner, but never before was it
so infectious.

As most fans of zombie movies know, the hero is never the zombie.
Everyone else around is, or will be, but not you. You are smart, lucky
and sane, just as you suspect. But where my zombie movie departs is that
the zombies in my story do not know they are zombies. In fact, they
think everyone else is a zombie. Thus, inside the zombie movie, everyone
is a hero in a zombie movie.

Zombie friends, zombie parents and zombie cousins confide their fears in
you of how everyone else is a zombie. It corroborates your belief that
you are sane when ideally it should make you wonder whether you too are
unaware of your transformation. You feel odd discussing “what to do
about zombies” with zombies, but play along.

You figure out some features of the virus and its transmission—there are
super transmitters who have a talent to excrete huge viral loads to
millions, and there are more modest transmitters who can only infect one
person at a time. And some people are more prone to get infected than
others. You like the theory that people who are intellectually superior,
who routinely consume supplements of superior knowledge, and who are
generally immune to nonsense, are less likely to be infected than people
who are not very smart.

You figure out what to do. The infected have to be quarantined, but then
no one believes they are infected. As we have seen, they think other
people, who are obsessed with one-liners that sound like news, are the
ones who are infected. So no zombie is going to self-quarantine. Also,
as we saw in the case of that minor pandemic, covid, every intellectual
tries to flog his solution as the best solution and condemns those who
disagree as “fools” or “corrupt” or “charlatans”. Also, in our movie,
most of the intellectuals themselves are zombies who don’t know they are
infected.

So you try to counter the transmission of the virus by transmitting your
own cure. You do this by tweeting your own big important fabulous ideas.
You notice something odd. The more sense you make, the less it is
transmitted. The more nonsense you state, the more it travels. Thus, you
realize, the medium of transmission itself has been taken over by the
virus.

Nevertheless, you valiantly fight on the social media. You find others
like you who are not zombies. You fall in love. There are some lovely
sex scenes. But after a month of knowing them, you realize that they,
too, have become infected.

Eventually, you give up and quarantine yourself. You become a monk. You
reject all the temptations—the wealth and pleasures that zombies offer
to infect you, their opinions and books. You are lonely, but you are not
a zombie. Or are you?

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
