# The enduring absurdity of following our role models

*2020-10-12*

One night, in a villa in Gurgaon, the drinking session of a circle of
friends entered the peacock phase, a standard chapter in a house party
when one person begins to display a special talent and others then show
theirs. Someone sat on the floor in a lotus position and rose without
using her arms or knees. A woman who was surprised to find out she could
not do that displayed her own superpower, which was to stay in plank
position for several minutes. Two people then started swinging on their
arms while seated. A man then showed he could do several push-ups.
Seeing this, another guy started doing push-ups on the back of his palm.
An amateur runner who could not do that without breaking his wrists
wondered if he should challenge everybody to a long midnight run.

As you can see, everyone here displayed something almost exceptional
their body could do because of long training or some physical anomaly,
and they demonstrated their gifts as evidence of specialness. At a
grander level, this is what “role models” do. Yet, those tipsy friends,
like the rest of the world, take role models seriously.

The origin of their peacock chapter itself was in a recent tweet from
one of India’s most famous role models—Milind Soman, who had posted a
video clip of himself sitting on the floor with his legs folded and
rising without any support but from the edges of his feet. This
manoeuvre had found fame a few years ago after people with impressive
medical degrees claimed that the elderly who can do it tend to live
longer than those who cannot. Many old people then tried to do it, and
injured themselves. What was merely supposed to be evidence of fitness
among senior citizens soon became something that people worked on to
achieve; a bit like what we do with aptitude tests. Many more will
injure themselves after watching Milind Soman’s clip. This though will
not be as destructive as the recent preening of a fitness simpleton who
had posted a video of himself swinging an LPG gas cylinder around
claiming it was an exercise. It was in reality the very opposite—an
impressive way to injure your back and shoulders.

The world is filled with bad role models. A disenchantment of life
emerges from this. People confuse what is impressive with what is truly
inspirational. Every extraordinary person, or every person who can do
one extraordinary thing, transmits two simultaneous messages, both
erroneous. One appears humble—“You too can do it”—and the other is vain:
“Why can’t you be like me”. This is at the heart of the advice
industry’s perpetuity. Successful people offer advice without revealing
or in ignorance of the overarching reason they are able to do that one
thing. This overarching reason could be a physical anomaly, mental
anomaly, or just genes. Millions who do not possess this crucial factor,
without which the task is impossible, try to imitate success and fail;
and then they seek more guidance, and are given more wrong guidance.

The absurdity of role models for physical health points to the kind of
rubbish that goes on in the mental health and spiritual advice
industries. A person with a particular mental condition sits on a
pedestal and asks others to be like him, or to do what he does, and
others who do not have his mental anomaly try in vain to achieve it,
misunderstanding a mere fog for a mountain that they must scale.

A new documentary on “bad-boy” billionaires makes something about wealth
clear to those who wish to see the truth—that, like in the case of
exceptional athletic fitness, the overarching reason why some people
become extremely wealthy cannot be imitated. They are simply scions of
rich dads, or corrupt in ways that are not possible for most people, or
just plain lucky. These are not virtues that a role model imparts. As a
result, they impart only the virtues that usually form the second rung
of reasons—like persistence and technical intelligence, which are
useless without the overarching factors.

This is why good-boy billionaires could be worse role models than
bad-boy billionaires. The unflattering paths to success of bad boys are
exposed, but the paths of good billionaires are rarely known. Let us not
forget many bad-boy billionaires were once good billionaires, who even
spoke like role models about how to be successful.

Another group of highly influential but useless role models are wealthy
underdogs. They hail from victimized segments of the society, but are
mostly also from extremely wealthy households. Like African-Americans,
Muslim migrants and others who are celebrated for facing “great odds”.
It is not that the famous among them did not have to fight any battles;
just that their success cannot be replicated by the other marginalized
without an overarching factor—an exceptional head start provided by a
very wealthy home. The lucky are not duds as stars; they are duds as
role models.

So is there no such thing as a role model? Are all imitations of
extraordinary people fated to fail? Can there be no inspiration at all?
That is not true. Who then is a good role model?

A meaningful role model is usually never a star. He or she instead is a
regular person who not merely shares your broad identity, like gender or
culture, but also is in your exact hyper-local situation, an ordinary
person with flaws who transcends his or her circumstances using ordinary
and imitable qualities. A true role model thus is often someone who
knows your name.
