# How wrong we are about actors is what makes them great

*2020-05-03*

A father cries at his son’s funeral. A man interrupts him, and asks if
he can cry louder, or quieter, say a word that is poignant maybe. The
actor attempts some variations. He has never been in this situation in
his real life. An unsung feature of all art, even though it defines the
very quality of an artist, is the element of conjecture — how an artist
guesses an experience he has never experienced, or even cares about. But
more consciously than other kinds of artists, an actor projects a farce
that other people then absorb as a deep emotion. That is the actor’s
job. Not only to be understood, but also to be somewhat misunderstood.

As the nation mourns the death of two beloved actors, Irrfan Khan and
Rishi Kapoor, who died last week, we see a quality in the tributes—the
homage is often more about the person paying the tribute than the men
who died. How they made the mourner feel, how old the mourner was when
that film released, what the mourner was going through when she saw that
memorable scene. You can argue there is a bit of this in every tribute
because people are full of themselves, but this level of self-absorption
tends to appear in public obituaries only when an actor dies.

At the heart of the special relationship between successful actors and
people is the fact that people see more in actors than the actors
themselves wish to display. In essence, an actor succeeds when people
develop wrong ideas about him.

People associate acting with faces, but the finest actors are primarily
great speakers, usually in one language. Acting itself, I believe, is
not making faces, but speaking. As we saw in Irrfan, especially, who had
power over us when he spoke in Hindi and was merely efficient or even
farcical in English films. An absurd thing Hollywood does is hire the
finest Indian actors only to make them speak in an unnatural way in
English. It is almost like hiring a great cricketer to play baseball.

Yes, there was Charlie Chaplin. But wasn’t he more dance and
choreography than acting? Millions of Tamilians will point to Kamal
Haasan’s Pesum Padam, a silent film ahead of its time. But then, bereft
of words, most actors in the film, except some extras, could stand up to
the great Kamal Haasan.

What about silences, you may say? Haven’t we all read about the
masterful silences of great actors. But then, if directors reveal the
history of many silent facial expressions, we will probably be baffled.
Some great menacing faces of an actor may have been of a moment when he
was just sitting around after a take, waiting for his cup of chai.

The talent of an actor is in the ambiguity of his personality, in being
the way he is for the world to deduce a million wrong meanings.

This phenomenon is even more powerful in actors who are not considered
actors. Most successful politicians, for instance. I don’t mean to say
they are tricksters. When we use the word “acting” outside the art of
acting, we usually mean it as some kind of a devious trick. But tricks
themselves are low forms of deviousness, and far more inefficient than
tricksters imagine. Powerful politicians, activists, gurus, writers,
singers do exactly what good actors do—they unknowingly radiate a broad
ambiguous idea and then millions of people see whatever they wish to
see.

In many aspects of life, the more clear a person is, the less successful
he will be because clarity is the end of a story. Ambiguity, on the
other hand, is the start of one.

M.G. Ramachandran, who could never make as many faces as his great rival
Sivaji Ganesan, and who could never pass the final test of a great Tamil
actor—which is the ability to laugh and cry at the same time—was a much
bigger star than all his contemporaries. Something in this Malayalee
born in Sri Lanka made millions of poor Tamilians misunderstand him as
one of them and their saviour. It is not something one achieves through
a mere trick. It takes a physical body that captures circumstance and a
vast collective illusion. It takes an actor.

Years after the reign of M.G.R., Rajinikanth, a Marathi-speaker born in
Karnataka would hold a similar sway in Tamil Nadu over the more
expressive Kamal Haasan.

A quality that many great actors—probably all professional
actors—possess that is not celebrated enough is their ability to permit
moments of debasement on screen.

Once, when I was interviewing Aamir Khan, a photographer asked him if he
would make some faces for the camera—a wide range of human emotions. It
seemed like a good idea, until Khan dismissed it with a degree of silent
contempt. Years later, I witnessed a similar moment when several members
of an audience begged the actor Nawazuddin Siddiqui, on stage, to repeat
a famous dialogue from a film. He refused. Without the context of a
cinematic scene, the two men found it undignified to indulge in a farce.
Yet, when there is context, an actor will go to great lengths to
diminish himself—like displaying nudity or performing sexual acts or
other things that are not glorious.

Any other person performing those things in public would be perceived as
debasing himself. But an actor survives that; he is even rewarded for
taking the risk. And he is celebrated. And wherever he goes, he is
chased by people.

What a strange thing stature is—people grant it grudgingly and they are
then in awe of what they themselves gave.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
