# No, this novel coronavirus won’t transform the world

*2020-04-05*

In the entire history of prose, does this sentence exist in any
language: “We are living in very unimportant times”?

Now it does, I know, but before this moment, no one might have said it.
People have always believed that they are living through monumental and
transformative times. Every generation, even without enduring a
pandemic, has an exaggerated reverence for the importance of its own
epoch. That is why I do not fully believe the emerging idea that a virus
has altered the world forever. The world after the pandemic will be
highly recognizable, even “normal”.

There will be some minor changes, of course. The cultural dominance of
the handshake will fade. The hug of acquaintances and foes will
mercifully stop. The great clearing of the throat, which is often taken
as a dialect of Malayalam, will not vanish but might attract more
attention than before in public spaces. The mask, which was until
recently only ubiquitous in East Asia, may sadly become a common urban
feature across the world. The gorgeous will somehow continue to look
gorgeous in a mask, but the more interesting features of the human face,
like the unprovoked seriousness of strangers passing by, their
mysterious sorrows and the comedy of noses especially, will be denied to
me and others who are interested. Masks might even become mandatory in
public transport systems, and anyone who sneezes in a Mumbai local train
will face a thousand stares. And a new question will arise: If most of a
city is going to be masked, what use are thousands of cameras? Should
these devices turn more sophisticated to recognize a person behind a
mask? Should people in public spaces be surveyed through their mobile
phones?

Many behaviours that were once condemned in India as casteist have
returned and may stay. The poor and the rich are both practising
untouchability and misanthropic distancing, and they are washing with
soap the memories of being in proximity of the other. Perhaps the way to
end casteism in India was never trying to abolish some practices but to
encourage everyone to practise them. Who would have thought that a day
would come when sanitation workers are showered with flowers by a
middle-class residential colony, and doctors asked to vacate? The
realization that doctors are at high risk of infection may stay long
after the epidemic is over. They might become a new social class,to be
occasionally felicitated by the clanging of plates but who may find it
harder to find homes.

A clever scholar may use these times to question, more convincingly than
ever, whether caste was defamed by the colonial woke, whether the caste
practices of ancient India were merely an after-effect of past epidemics
in eras when castes were just professional guilds.

The entity that has emerged the strongest from the pandemic is the
State, which has demonstrated that it can lock down a billion odd people
if there is a moral reason.

But the pandemic will leave untouched the most important foundations of
the world. It will not create a new class of the powerful or the rich.
It will not create new heads of state, nor ruin old billionaires. In
fact, the same politics that divided societies has created much of the
divisive news emanating from the virus. In the US, because President
Donald Trump has expressed his dislike for the idea of a lockdown and
intellectuals have supported it, “right-wingers” have been exhorting
others to congregate, celebrate, shake hands and hug, and open the
economy. In India, it is the opposite. Prime Minister Narendra Modi
asked Indians to stay indoors, and so the lockdown has the same timbre
as patriotism, and intellectuals have been lamenting its effect on the
poor.

Modi seems to have become more popular among his fans, with his fatherly
appearances on television asking Indians to do stuff in unison, and
those who were not given to his charm apparently remain uncharmed.
Nothing has changed.

The pandemic reminds us of a fascinating political truth. Politicians
can lose their popularity after instituting welfare programmes and
building infrastructure like the metro system, but they can become more
popular after putting people through hardship for a greater moral good,
as in the aftermath of “demonetization” and now this lockdown.

However, India will squander this once-in-a-generation chance to clean
itself up. Yet, this too is evidence that covid-19 will not transform us
in significant ways.

And, the office will not die. This is largely because bosses are not
bosses if they cannot see their subordinates. Also, what people once
thought was freedom from office has shown itself to be an extreme sort
of boredom in this lockdown. It is as if people have been condemned to
domestic life. They will also travel extensively, and not always for
excellent reasons.

Corona makes me wonder if it was some ancient pandemic that infected
humans with monogamy. Even if that were so, our pandemic will change
nothing about sleeping with strangers. Even at the height of the AIDS
hysteria, sex with strangers did not diminish; it just became
rubber-coated. There will be similar modifications.

And, God will not die. There will be huge religious gatherings and
pilgrimages. And pubs will open; there will be concerts and vacations
and great collective joys. Because everything that people do, they do
because they have nothing better to do. That alone will return to us the
world before corona.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’.
