# The modernity of Arvind Kejriwal’s Hindu politics

*2020-02-16*

This year, the Academy Awards ceremony may have reminded millions of
Americans why they veer toward Donald Trump. Usually the dullest part of
the ceremony is the gushing gratitude of the winners who have, in the
past, thanked Harvey Weinstein more often than God, according to an
analysis of Oscar speeches. This year, it was dull for the sheer amount
of righteous posturing. Joaquin Phoenix lectured us about animals
rights; Natalie Portman wore a cape that carried names of female
directors who had never been honoured at the Oscars, even though Portman
herself has worked with very few women directors. A documentary
film-maker whose work was funded by the Obamas quoted *The Communist
Manifesto*. And Jane Fonda said that to reduce waste, she would not buy
new clothes anymore.

There is nothing wrong with anything they said. In fact, they said the
right things. Even so, the way of the world is that the facile moral
posturing of the rich and beautiful pushes ordinary folks to take a
political stand that is the exact opposite. It makes good people take
the side of down-to-earth evil.

But there are some public figures who have the ability to appear highly
idealistic without putting off the masses. Barack Obama is one of them.
And for very different reasons, Arvind Kejriwal.

There are a few reasons why Kejriwal’s righteousness does not annoy most
voters, apart from the broad reason that he is male and the world has a
mysterious intolerance of righteous women, as American presidential
candidate Elizabeth Warren is beginning to find out.

There is a manner in which Kejriwal speaks that ensures what he says is
never a lecture. He reminds me of one of the best insights into public
speaking I have ever read, which was a piece of wisdom Bal Thackeray’s
father gave him—that a politician should not preach, he should “gossip
with the people”.

Kejriwal gossips with voters. He says what is wrong, who is responsible,
and he keeps it all simple. A few years ago, at the start of his career
as an electoral politician, he seemed to figure out that there were many
things journalists could not say in fear of libel, and other reasons,
but they could say those things by quoting him. And for a brief period,
he hosted dramatic press conferences to gossip. It was all very
interesting.

Also, his austere clothing is not the fancy dress of Indian politics,
where politicians are clad in a way Indians almost never are. How
Kejriwal appears is very close to the average Indian male. His is more
authentic than Gandhi’s attire in his time or even that of R.K. Laxman’s
common man.

But more important than all this is the fact that he does not derive his
values from the Western template of idealism. Liberal templates are
useful for people who are inherently jerks, but wish to be good people
or look good.

Kejriwal is a provincial man, a temple-goer, a man who believes in God.
He calls for the death of rapist-murderers, glorifies patriotism, and
believes that Kashmir belongs to India. He is not infected by the
template of organized compassion.

Recently, when an interviewer asked him to recite the Hanuman Chalisa,
he recited it. He was not foolish enough to deny his Hindu devotion just
because he needed Muslim votes. And he is not afraid to call India
“Bharat Mata”, or chant *Vande Mataram*. He knows that every religious
person, no matter of what faith, fully understands and respects the
devotion of the other.

He has challenged Hindu nationalists to chant any of the sacred Hindu
hymns. He claims they are fake Hindus. It would be comical if someone
ambushes famous Hindu nationalists and challenges them to prove their
devotion by reciting the Hanuman Chalisa or even *Vande Mataram*.

In this way, Kejriwal is a modern Hindu politician—a believer who is
culturally rooted to faith and nation, but says all religions must
coexist. He always stops short of annoying average Hindus by not
labouring the point of “secularism”.

His greatest quality though is the cunning to win elections in India
without illicit money or inciting tension. Kejriwal is a reminder that
the guardians of the poor and the weak have a moral obligation not to be
political duds—those well-meaning men, who were genetically ordained to
enter politics, activists who lament everything but can barely save
themselves, righteous artists. For, in the care of duds, the poor always
lose, even as the duds ensure more capable leaders do not emerge.

Kejriwal’s most important decision in his professional life was to take
on the duds. That is how he pivoted from low-stakes sanctimonious
activism, which involved intermittent fasting, to high-stakes politics.
As an activist who created an anti-Congress movement, which was widely
misunderstood as an anti-corruption movement, he was a part of a cabal
that swore not to enter politics because politics was “dirty”. The fight
against corruption, they suggested, was best left to a group of
Magsaysay winners. When he was a safe activist, India’s upper classes
celebrated him, but when he entered electoral politics, they found
reasons to despise him because he was now a potent threat. They called
him “an anarchist”.

The nationalism of the Bharatiya Janata Party is of pride. Kejriwal’s
nationalism goes beyond, as it is built on shame. India has done foolish
things in search of pride; the country has achieved much when it has
been ashamed of itself.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
