# A theory on what possibly saves the rich from the poor

*2020-11-01*

How do the rich survive in a country that is vastly poor? There are
several famous reasons. I wish to illuminate a little-known one.

There is a civil war going on among the poor. It is invisible because we
do not look at the poor carefully. And this cold war inadvertently saves
the rich from a violent end to their luck. At least for now.

We are trained to imagine many things on behalf of the poor. Most of
them are wrong, as sociological conjectures often turn out to be. Like
the myth that the poor “envy” the rich. The poor do have a grouse
against the rich, but grouse is not envy. Just as you don’t envy Mukesh
Ambani, the poor don’t envy you. Because envy is among peers. Envy is a
consequence of equality. There is another related force that equality
exerts, which is derived from the same complex strands of people sharing
the same social plane: hatred.

Equals do thrive when they cooperate, but often economic and social
equals compete for the same thin band of resources. This is why, outside
academic and journalist rhetoric, in real-life situations, the poor seem
to hate each other as much or even more than they do the upper classes.
As in the case of envy, they may have a theoretical sense that they
should hate the “big people” more, but they actually appear to direct
this emotion at people who are very much like them.

Let me present what I see every single day in Gurgaon. Housemaids are
stopped at the gates and harassed by security guards, who are usually
malnourished men in paramilitary costumes from the same social and
economic backgrounds as the maids. The guards have no one else to bully.
Also, harassing is a form of flirtation. The only threats the maids face
during their journey from their impoverished residences to their
affluent places of work are from men and women who are a lot like them.
Traffic cops are more likely to harass motorcyclists than owners of
luxury sedans. All the bribes that the poor pay are to people from their
own class or an economic rung not very higher than their own. The
violent war between police and Naxals is in reality a war between the
poor and the poorer.

The rich do harm the poor in invisible and complex ways, but the most
visibly violent and unjust experiences of the nation are within various
sections of the poor. This, in turn, has been one of the most
under-appreciated reasons why the poor have not stormed the colonies of
their masters.

Dalits are among the poor who have the clearest view of the elite as
foes. Yet, even they face most of their visible daily injustices from
their own. There are about a thousand recognized subcastes within the
Dalit community, and the seemingly unavoidable Indian caste hierarchy is
followed here. The top echelons of the community, like Vankars and
Mahars, do not dine with or marry Valmikis and others who have
traditionally been sanitation workers. Dalits thus seem to perpetrate
the same injustices that they accuse upper castes of committing. This is
inspiring the lowest of the low among Dalits to ask for reservations
within the country’s quota for Scheduled Castes.

The poorest Dalit subcastes, which go by different names in different
states, have long complained that elite Dalits have more or less
cornered that quota. Some communities have prospered over the years
because they had major social and economic headstarts, which made them
unbeatable in the battle for reserved seats in colleges and reserved
government jobs, which deepened the inequality between them and the
rest.

Resources are finite, life is hard, and equals are rivals. This could be
one of the reasons why in the 2019 general elections, the poor across
north India were found to have largely voted for Narendra Modi, or his
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Electoral analysts explain that this was
because of Modi’s charm and sweeping “nationalism”. I don’t find these
explanations convincing. It is unusual for upper classes and the poor to
have identical views on almost anything except the two big fables of
divinity and nationhood; so I feel there must have been a powerful
selfish reason why the poor voted for a party that also seems the
beloved of billionaires and millionaires. It could be possible that a
poor majority had the impression that a minority group that is just as
poor, or poorer, being subdued by nationalistic thugs emboldened by the
BJP’s rise could reduce competition for jobs.

Violence against migrants and Muslims in India is often couched in a
cultural war, but there is enough to suggest that it is about jobs and
sharing meagre resources, too.

The rich, on the other hand, create resources. They are the employers of
the poor. Yes, there are many aspects of their lives that are visually
repulsive to the thinking, philosophical poor, but their view of the
rich also includes their reformative roles— conscientious teenaged girls
trying to teach the children of their maids and drivers; refined
do-gooders trying to make lives better. I have met a man who started a
free library in his Mumbai house for poor aspirants to the civil
services; and an old lawyer who fought cases without charging a fee; and
several doctors who treated the poor for free. These too are the optics
of Indian life that the poor see every day. As a cultural bloc, the rich
might seem villainous to an unknowable number of the poor, but compared
to their own neighbours and equals, and even husbands and in-laws, the
rich also appear more decent, nobler, more generous, nicer and safer to
them.
