# Our absurd notions of what’s essential and what’s not

*2020-04-12*

As the extraordinary lockdown of the nation continues, these are,
according to India, Essential Things—maida , rice, sugar, milk, refined
sunflower oils, bread, brown bread which is maida with a brown dye, and
fruit juices which are sugar, chemicals and pulp. Not only can you live
for decades without these “essentials”, you will be healthier, more
beautiful and less likely to die in a pandemic if you avoid them.

One way or another, most essentials are a result of a planet-wide
addiction to a drug called sugar. They are harmful, they are cheap as
they are produced in large quantities because they are “essential” even
when there is no pandemic, and every kilogram of most essential things
requires hundreds of litres of fresh water. They represent the tyranny
of a majority, like religion.

But then these foods, like religion, bring joy to millions. However,
that is not the reason why they are classified as essentials. In a
crisis, joy is not considered an essential thing. Being alive is. There
is something absurd and meaningless about the concept of Essential
Things. It is an idea that is filled with wrong assumptions.

The same absurd idea is at play in the treatment of that perennial
global disease—poverty . There is an important assumption that India
makes about what is “essential”—the notion that what the poor need is
only food, and that their bellies have to be filled with starch and
sugar. I am not disputing that cheap food is a basic necessity; I am
disputing the idea that a basic necessity is the same as what is
essential.

The extraordinary power of the idea that grain and sugar are sacred
essentials for the poor has created an indestructible system, a
private-public partnership that produces them cheap at an industrial
scale, denying most of India the habit of healthier diet. The first sign
of new prosperity for hundreds of millions of Indians is high blood
sugar. The reason why vegetables, eggs and meat are not subsidized at
the scale of grain and sugar is that proteins are not considered as
essential as simple sugars.

Being alive is merely a platform, living is a very different matter,
even for the poor, but the benevolent world does not accept that. Time
and again, the poor have demonstrated that they value fun as much as
survival. Except in extreme circumstances, like famine, the poor have
disproved the favourite assumption of the rich that basics are a greater
necessity than fun.

That the poor must be interested only in the grim business of
“essentials” and that fun is a flippant thing is not a mistake that only
the Indian government makes. Even the American tech industry was trapped
by the nonsense of Essential Things. Every time tech billionaires
thought of building a computer or phone for the poor, they imagined it
will be used to check “the price of a crop”. Even Mark Zuckerberg
imagined a special internet for the poor that contained only educational
and informative sites that, of course, would have helped a poor farmer
check the price of his crop. But then the reason why the poor adopted
phones and the internet was the same as that of the rich—not to discuss
diarrhoea, but to pursue fun.

The true nature of sorrow is boredom. That is why even in a transient
phenomenon like the lockdown of a nation, boredom is not a trivial
matter.

When I was younger, I believed that in a calamity, the only people who
mattered were doctors, engineers and scientists. Even assuming, wrongly,
that most books and films were not bad at all, I thought artists were
the most useless in a calamity. I was, as you can see, trapped in the
myth of essentials. Now I feel differently. I see all around me that
what keeps people going, what makes them suffer greatly just to be alive
in a crisis, and to follow draconian orders, is the promise of fun,
which is largely a creation of artists.

It is amusing to note that today most of India is immersed in all sorts
of films and series, our presumed inessentials, while hospitals, an
essential service, are seeing fewer patients than normal because people
are so terrified of corona, hospitals and doctors, that they are putting
off medical procedures.

As I write this column, cops are enforcing a containment sealing of my
colony in Gurugram, a commodious residential area of row houses, where
there have been no covid cases. Weeks ago, there were two cases in a
high-rise hundreds of metres away. I hear even walks and runs will be
banned, even though the colony is so spacious that people in public
spaces are usually separated by a hundred metres. In fact, to get closer
than six feet to another, you have to hate or love them or simply want
to be infected. No one is sure why the government is wasting its
resources on sealing a somewhat sparsely populated colony with no
history of the disease.

The world has responded to the pandemic in two ways—the Chinese way,
which is the lockdown of an economy, and the more relaxed but cautious
way of, say, Japan and Sweden, that lets life flow. India is imitating
China, and has in the process become the world’s most stringent adopter
of the lockdown method. In all of the Western world, except in stray
pockets, people are actually encouraged to go out and exercise.

The office of the deputy commissioner of Gurugram reassured me that it
will release a list of reasonable exceptions. I hope it does not share
the ancient confusion in India about Essential Things. Anything that is
fun, anything that brings happiness to people, we are trained to think
is inessential.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
