# Why a majority’s story often fails to convince the world

*2020-03-08*

Across the world, a large number of Hindus are angry. Others are saying
that there was a mass murder of Muslims in India last month. American
and European politicians, professors, taxi drivers and the most serious
people of our times, comedians, are using words like “pogrom” and
“genocide” to describe the recent Delhi riots in which fewer than 60
people were killed. Upset Hindus want to say that it is a small number
for unnatural Indian deaths, by Indian standards, which is one of those
Indian statements that is at once a fact and a gaffe. They do manage to
point out that many of the dead were actually Hindus, but the world is
not listening.

US presidential hopeful, Bernie Sanders said there was “widespread
anti-Muslim mob violence”, and another noted American politician,
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (AOC) said Prime Minister Narendra Modi was
“ethnically cleansing” India’s “religious minorities”. Those who live
here know these statements are not only outlandish but could also put
the lives of many of us in India in danger, as they are reportedly being
exploited by Islamist terror groups.

The most enduring images of the riots were of assaults on Muslims and of
cops themselves joining Hindu mobs to attack Muslims. But much later
emerged footage of a large apparently Muslim mob armed with stones and
sticks assaulting a few poorly equipped cops. More contagious than this
video clip was the image of a cinematic young Muslim called Shahrukh
pointing a gun at an unarmed cop. If this had occurred in the US,
Shahrukh would have been shot dead by the police. Neither Sanders nor
AOC would have questioned the right of the police to shoot an armed
raging man.

Why is it that angry Hindus have been unable to tell their side of the
story to the world? How is it that the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party,
whose area of speciality is telling great stories to a billion Hindus,
seems to have failed in this matter? A rookie writer in the global
liberal network can tell a more influential lie than the most powerful
political party in the world can convey a dull fact.

There are three broad reasons why the Hindu camp has been unable to tell
its side.

One: The fact is that nobody cares. People think that stories are
powerful because everybody cares about these. This is wrong. The truth
is that nobody cares for your story or for you. What matters to people
is themselves. They are always searching for themselves or their beliefs
and prejudices in a story. Sanders or AOC might see in the riots what
they wish to see—a majority oppressing a minority. “Hindus and Muslims
equally to blame” is not a story, not even a retweetable tweet.

We often think a misunderstanding is due to lack of understanding. But
often, people misunderstand because it is more interesting and suits
them at that point in time. Empathy itself is a medium of
misunderstanding, not understanding.

The world has extolled “empathy” as the most human of all human
qualities, but it is a process of self-absorption. It is this force that
made some Muslim nations condemn India for the riots. The Supreme Leader
of Iran, Ayatollah Khamenei, said: “The hearts of Muslims all over the
world are grieving over the massacre of Muslims in India.” He may never
give work visas to low-skilled Indian Muslims, but his heart will beat
for them, just as the hearts of Indian Hindus beat for Pakistani Hindus,
as though Indian Hindus treat one another with so much love they now
need foreigners to love.

Two: Exaggerations protect the weak. Many Indian journalists, who knew
better, saw no need to refute claims that the riots were “a genocide” or
“ethnic cleansing”, and wisely so.

From reports that have emerged, it is clear that in the first hours both
Hindus and Muslims were responsible for the violence. But then, cops
sought revenge on Muslims for a violent attack on them. Hindu criminals
meanwhile were better organized for a modern dark strategy, which was to
hand out disproportionate punishment to Muslims. Impoverished Muslims
are extremely vulnerable in a riot. Sometimes, truth is not as important
as the protection of the weak from the strong. Exaggerations serve to
defend the weak.

Also, what is tricky about a riot is that an objective analysis can be
right one day, and completely wrong the next. What was “spontaneous” for
three hours can transform into a planned attack, as we have seen before.
So, there is no motivation for many sane and humane influencers to be
“objective” when exaggerations that get the world’s attention can help
India’s Muslims more than their own politicians. An old code of survival
is that when your thug cannot protect you, find a bigger thug. The West
is the bigger thug for Indian Muslims.

Reason three: You cannot beat liberals in storytelling. The response of
hurt Hindus to their global defamation has chiefly been lament. But it
is in the nature of storytelling that the strong tell bad stories. A
majority population, or the victors of an era, cannot transmit powerful
stories of their suffering. A defining quality of our times is that the
strong are trying to imitate the ways of the oppressed to tell their
stories. Brahmins, Caucasians, Israelis, and men have all tried. But it
does not work.

Considering the nature of storytelling, there is no way a majority can
tell their side. One way to ensure that they are not defamed in the
future, though, is to ensure that there are no riots in India.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
