# Mark Zuckerberg might be mostly right about Twitter

*2020-05-31*

Last week, Donald Trump was right about something. In fact, the American
president was right more than once. And Twitter made one gigantic
mistake.

This is what happened. Around the time Trump was tweeting a discredited
conspiracy theory about the death of a woman, and her family was begging
Twitter to remove the tweets, which it declined citing free speech, the
social media giant did something extraordinary. It flagged two of the
president’s tweets that were far less spurious but concerned what the
social media outfit seems to think is our most sacred idea—elections.

The two tweets expressed Trump’s contempt for postal voting in the
impending presidential elections this year. Voting by mail is permitted
in the US, but its use is limited to a few voters. In the light of our
pandemic, there is now a plan to significantly expand its scope,
allowing millions to vote without visiting polling stations.

Trump tweeted: “There is NO WAY (ZERO!) that Mail-In Ballots will be
anything less than substantially fraudulent. Mail boxes will be robbed,
ballots will be forged & even illegally printed out & fraudulently
signed…” This tweet and a following one on the subject were flagged by
Twitter in a line that said, “Get the facts about mail-in ballots”, a
sanctimonious intervention that led to a small paragraph with the
headline, “Trump makes unsubstantiated claim that mail-in ballots will
lead to voter fraud”.

Defending this extraordinary move, Twitter’s chief executive officer
Jack Dorsey said, “We’ll continue to point out incorrect or disputed
information about elections globally…”

But, despite the fact that the ‘NO WAY’ bit in his tweet was hyperbole,
Trump was not entirely wrong. The New York Times, in 2012, had reported
there was “error and fraud” in postal ballots. Hours after the flagging
of Trump, a columnist for the Washington Post, Marc A. Thiessen, argued
in defence of Trump’s observations: “No one questions that mail-in
ballots have much higher rates of not being counted.”

Mark Zuckerberg, the co-founder of Facebook, said that social media
platforms should not be “the arbiter of truth”. He is right for some
simple and complex reasons.

If Twitter, a private corporation, is going to decide what is true and
what is free speech, what happens if tomorrow a Chinese company buys out
Twitter? Assume the Chinese government has a huge known or secret stake
in that Chinese company. Will China then decide what is free speech and
what statements by heads of states it will flag? Will the same group of
people who support Dorsey’s fact-checking of Trump today oppose a
Chinese billionaire’s fact-checking of Zoe Saldana tomorrow (my future
Democratic presidential candidate)?

Also, how does Twitter know what exactly is a fact, or even what is the
truth, which are two different things? Even in the simple case of postal
ballots, where the substance of Trump’s claim has support in the
“respectable media”, Twitter got its reaction wrong.

Also, the view that people want to consume truth, that they flock to
social media for the truth, or that they should consume truth alone, is
too simple a view of human beings. Most ideas are ambiguous and their
transmission and content are usually determined by politics. The
transformative power of fake news itself is political fake news. Fake
news does not make a strong man more successful than he already is.
Rather, a piece of fake news becomes successful because it is about a
highly popular man and tells a story that millions want to believe. This
is why Trump is more popular than boiled beetroot.

Enraged by Twitter’s bias, Trump has set out to dismantle a thin piece
of legislation that ensures social media platforms are not held
accountable for their user content. On Thursday, he signed an executive
order that threatened to legally turn social media platforms into
regular publishers.

Yet, it is not as though Twitter’s Dorsey has no defence at all. If you
are the head of Twitter, and you consider yourself a sane and good
person, and you wield this enormous power to transmit news to hundreds
of millions and shape the truths of your time, would you think it is
morally right to have no control at all over the transmission? Insanity
and evil are good conductors of news and emotions. Wouldn’t you then
pick a flawed but less dangerous side and intervene in the power of your
own product—for a good cause?

Apple is many great capitalist things, but isn’t it also Steve Jobs’
emotional point of view? Isn’t Tesla, too, a point of view? Aren’t all
points of views political in some form? Why shouldn’t Twitter then have
a view that will perform its ultimate task as a profit-oriented
corporation—attract or repel consumers? Twitter says it is ready to face
the consequences, like all good companies do.

Our age is a highly democratic one, and the evidence is in a maligned
phenomenon called “polarization”. As this column has argued, the
defamation of polarization is the parting curse delivered by those who
have lost control over the transmission of ideas. The way we have turned
out, we now marvel at a time when religious patriots and
asparagus-eaters, the Republicans and Democrats, used to read the same
newspapers and watch the same news channels. One day, we will marvel at
the fact that they used to rant on the same social media sites.

The lure of the network effect is not enough to justify the monopolies
of present-day social media platforms in a world that wishes to be two
sulking hemispheres.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
