# A practical reason why businesses should resist bullies

*2020-10-18*

One day a billionaire walked into a meeting of journalists. He guessed,
correctly, that we were talking “something negative” and that we were,
as usual, plotting the downfall of the government and the powerful. He
then said, “Baniye ki moochh hamesha neeche hoti hai.” For those who
don’t follow Hindi, an English translation will have no meaning. He’s
not of the Baniya caste; he was using the word figuratively to denote
India’s business class. And what he meant was that merchants are by
nature more practical than courageous; that they never antagonize the
powerful.

There is a general perception that the whole business spectrum, which
includes industrialists, entrepreneurs, merchants and salaried
executives, is given to being pragmatic instead of idealistic, amiable
with authority instead of being confrontational, and compliant instead
of being bold. This is why in the past few days, Tanishq, a Tata-owned
jewellery brand, received much understanding, even sympathy, from
perhaps millions of regular people after it withdrew a commercial to
appease a mob. The commercial showed a pregnant Hindu woman in a Muslim
household getting along with an affable Muslim mother-in-law. A small
segment of Hindus objected to the commercial, claiming to be offended,
though it is not very clear what exactly offended them, apart from the
detail of a Hindu woman being married to a Muslim man. You may think
there was a semblance of an argument. All of us do get angry now and
then, and we try to dress it up in “facts” and other farces. But in this
case, there is nothing worthy of mention. I am certain that if it was a
pregnant Muslim girl in a Hindu household, there would have been no
rage, though I cannot substantiate this unless there is another ad with
such a plot line.

In any case, what happened was that even though Tanishq had done nothing
wrong and it had only made a lame film about human love, it capitulated
to a bunch of trolls. The brand’s reputation is intact because
corporations and the rest of the business class appear to have a moral
right not to stand up to bullies. This is a perception granted by people
in general because those people in general work for corporations and are
acquainted with the usefulness of practical retreats. They think that
fighting for what is right at the risk of losses is something only a
certain type of artist, journalist or activist does. In reality, it is
this notion that is impractical and an affront to the wisdom of
capitalism. All too often, practicality is a masquerade for poor
analysis.

It is not hard to understand why most people give corporations a long
rope. Companies have too much to lose. A small group of inconsequential
people can harm them in ways that are disproportionate to their
individual powers. Most brands gain nothing by acquiring a controversial
image. Most products are about happiness and no company wants to remind
its consumers of the unpleasantness of life. It is no coincidence that
rebellion is the nature of people in low-paying professions or with low
prospects. This also explains why arts students agitate more than
engineering students, and why sons of poor men are more likely to rebel
against their dads than the sons of rich men. Also, while India’s
refined imitators of the West may bloviate about “institutions’, the
fact is they never built any in the decades that they had tremendous
influence. As a result, there is little that protects Indians who take
cultural risks unlike, say, American companies and public figures who
have exquisite freedoms. Also, people who seek freedom of expression are
usually those who earn their livelihood from expression—so idealists are
just small practical entrepreneurs like writers and filmmakers.

Even so, there is a reason why businesses should exhibit more cultural
guts, why it is wise for the entire business community to resist
bullies, and why entrepreneurs should behave like artists.

We do not need the abstraction of morality to do the right thing. Logic
can show what it is. In most situations, if not all, we indeed know what
it is. Often, there is only one right way, and a million wrong ways. A
single right way is clarity, a million wrong ways is confusion.
Sometimes idealism is the clarity of the single right way.

Freedom of expression is not entirely about entertainment, nor merely
about the right to offend. In a society where storytelling does not have
wide cultural freedom, where a mob can regulate it by claiming to be
offended, the kind of people who become powerful are largely useless,
even destructive, to the economy. In India, it is far easier for someone
to get attention by raking up pointless issues than through ingenious
civic administration. For the same reasons, it is very easy for mediocre
artists and activists to gain attention, even an international
reputation, by annoying a small mob.

When the bar is too low for cultural and activist charlatans to succeed
through facile gimmicks, society as a whole is impoverished.

Also, in a world where the successful, the smart and the happy feel that
they have too much to lose by standing up to bullies, the very idea of
rebellion has been taken over by the down-and-out and the dejected.
Anarchy is the day job of people with very little to lose. Every time a
corporation capitulates to a bully, it not only empowers a small mob of
cultural guardians, it also empowers future disenchanted foes of
capitalism.

And yes, a free society does make better cinema.
