# Why social media isn’t really the real villain of this age

*2020-09-20*

The Social Dilemma is a documentary that conveys something you have
heard many times, but with ominous background music. The facts in the
90-minute film take less than a minute, it seems, to narrate: Social
media and email are designed to keep you hooked to your phone and away
from “real world”, a superior place where people drink barley and eat
sugar with real friends, or say “What’s up” to real acquaintances and
look over their shoulders to see if there are more interesting people
around.

Everything else about the documentary is melodramatic and dishonest
evangelism of a band of “good guys” who were part of the tech industry
that created social media and Google. Some of them encashed their stock
options and are very rich today, while others appear to have lost out.

The band of late heroes is lead by Tristan Harris, a type of man who
calls himself an “ethicist”, who looks angelic and unthreatening, who
says all the right things, who pauses for effect and smiles sadly, a
hero of people who believe in heroes and therefore never ask what is
behind a heroic action.

At the very start of the documentary, the heroes say or imply that the
tech industry is not evil by design. But soon the documentary appears to
realize that a successful story requires heroes, and heroes require
villains. So it sets out to define the villains—the social media
companies and Google and others whose products have intoxicated the
world.

But then Netflix, which streams this documentary, is even more addictive
than social media. Without this streaming service and the transmission
of its existence by word-of-mouth on social media, the documentary would
have been doomed. Hypocrisy in good people is known as “irony”.

The “ethicists” of the documentary inevitably tell you that if you’re
not paying for media content, then you are not the customer, “you’re the
product”. The way they claim your time is harvested for “advertisers”,
you would think they have never heard of *The New York Times* or *The
Guardian* or BBC, the revered products of their type whose golden years
were funded by advertisers. Advertisers have always funded or greatly
subsidized quality journalism. Now, on social media, they have a more
efficient way of spending money.

The “ethicists” accuse social media of manipulating human psychology.
But this is the objective of every business, including documentaries,
streaming platforms and food industry players that permeate the
three-dimensional “real” world seen at risk by *The Social Dilemma* .
The manipulation of psychology is also the objective of all arts, but
then these arts have failed on this front because they are run by
cartels that promote dud self-absorbed bores who never ask, “What do you
want?”

The Social Dilemma itself manipulates human psychology in very obvious
ways. It exploits the emptiness in salaried people who see hope in every
email, and the nameless grief of the bored, and the fear of parents that
their children are turning into zombies (like them). The film features
some menacing actors who play the bad guys who run tech companies. They
stand behind machines and turn dials to control your emotions. Social
media algorithms are represented as the sentinel machines you have seen
in films, so that you are suitably scared. Of course, there is no
activist deceit that is possible without the use of suicide data. The
“ethicists” of the film imply that people kill themselves because of the
emotions unleashed by social media.

Harris claims that the world is worried about social media. In contrast,
he says, when the bicycle appeared, our ancestors had not complained. He
is wrong. When the bicycle emerged, the sanctimonious dismissed it as a
frivolity of the wealthy youth. Poet John Keats called it “the nothing
of its day”. It was deemed dangerous. Books, too, horrified people once.

The “ethicists” of every era have always whined about the way of the
world, and about how no one has time for the wonderful art of the
whiner. Guess the era of the novel this is extracted from: “Long novels
written today are perhaps a contradiction: the dimension of time has
been shattered, we cannot love or think except in fragments of time each
of which goes off along its own trajectory and immediately disappears”.

This is from the novel If on a Winter’s Night a Traveler by Italo
Calvino, published in 1979, and the whine against social media today is
exactly the same. In any age, a lament of a noted writer is never an
accurate analysis of the world, but rather the writer’s grouse against
fast becoming obsolete.

In trying to make the power of social media sound terrifying, the
documentary mentions an American basketball star who was persuaded to
believe that the world was flat. This is symbolic of the sham this
documentary itself is.

Unlike that basketball star, you do not believe the world is flat. Why?
The intellect and mental health of a person has an overarching influence
on what news he or she will consume. The platform itself is
inconsequential. Your choice of disinformation will never be that the
Earth is flat; it is likely to be more sophisticated—that Russia
influenced the last American presidential election, or that The Social
Dilemma is a work of honest humanitarianism.

“How do you wake up from the matrix?” a good guy in the documentary
asks. Some people think that just because they can ask this question, it
means they themselves are not part of the matrix.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
