# How ugly public spaces could work to reassure people

*2020-12-13*

When the government recently revealed the design of India’s new
parliament building, Indians debated its beauty. But they did not ask an
important question. Did the government wish to achieve beauty?
Symbolism, yes; safety and economy, of course, but beauty? The thing is,
it is actually very rare for India to consider beauty an important
factor in the design of a building, or even a town. Provincial India,
which also rules the country to a significant extent, somehow accepts
that temples and other religious places should be primarily beautiful,
but not other kinds of buildings.

From an aesthetic point of view, India today is where Indians where
until recently with respect to tourism—they needed the excuse of God and
pilgrimage to spend money on the fun of travel. Without God, modern
India is a bit lost about architectural beauty. The country seems
unconvinced that it should spend immense amounts of money on spectral
secular beauty.

I once saw the newly-built head office of a fellowship of patriots. They
had worked hard to make it look hideous . The brief to the architect
must have been “Make it modern but Indian, and atheistic”. The result is
an irregular thing whose ground floor has large rectangular glass
windows, and the floor above has contiguous arches like the gums of a
toothpaste model. There are slim pillars here and there. As the building
is not colonial or Hindu or Islamic, or beautiful in other ways, it is
familiar to most Indians who pass by as a place that is contemporary.
Much thought goes into the ugliness of our great republic.

As this column had once argued, most nations in plain sight try to look
richer than they are; India in plain sight is a lot poorer than what it
is in reality. And this modern spatial ugliness of India performs an
important function.

It reminds most Indians that the nation belongs to them. This is similar
to the effect of street chaos and our general civic disorder—millions
who hail from chaotic places, who only know chaos and the absence of
order, are not alienated. Except for some exquisite metropolitan
services, like the Delhi Metro, India’s public spaces truly belong to
India’s public. They feel they can do almost anything and get away.

Urban order is a form of intelligence, but it also creates a sense of
loneliness, a kind of structured gloom. For instance, when an affluent
nation solves its urban congestion, it does so by creating vast
infrastructure that hides humans—by distributing people across so many
broad streets that the human element on every lane is thin, or by
putting them in safe swanky trains under the ground or in covered
walkways. The idea is not to hide people; however, it is the by-product
of a good city plan.

The disorder of India should not be venerated. It kills thousands every
day and causes unspeakable misery to the poor. Even so, like the
industry of electoral politics, it does contribute to peace between the
classes. The persistence of India’s poverty, its chaos, its
mismanagement, and the sheer ugliness of its public spaces ensure that
nobodies do not feel like foreigners in their own nation.

Grand symbols of progress, like giant cable-stayed bridges and grand
exquisite buildings, have vast uses, but they also contribute to
disharmony in society, for they visually emphasize the failures of the
unlucky. For instance, imagine how the poor of western Europe might feel
in the spectacular urban beauty of its great cities. You are in Paris,
say, and broke, gloomy and jobless, then you walk into a spectacular
lane. I think you will feel more broke, gloomy and jobless.

The poor in a rich country are like a bitter Twitter page trapped in
Instagram, where everyone else is beautiful and having a good time. Even
though a majority there have access to a quality of life in public
places that is superior to that of millionaires in India, they probably
harbour the disenchantment of being surrounded by the exquisite .

India, on the other hand, makes even tech look ugly by promoting it as
science that has no good reason to exist if it is not helping some poor
farmer check the prices of crops. India even made rocket science boring
in an age when rocket science was hot—by chiefly pitching satellites as
a welfare programme for farmers. This way, India’s space programme did
not infuriate the poor.

It is not only India’s poor who feel a connection to India through its
spatial chaos; it is also ordinary Pakistanis.

About 18 years ago, when I visited Pakistan, I could see that most
ordinary Pakistanis did not have a grasp of what India really was. One
evening in Peshawar, a conservative, bearded 20-year-old Pakistani boy
barged into my hotel room. I thought, like many Pakistanis before him,
he wished to bore me with claims of neighbourly brotherhood. But he had
only one thing to say, a question: did girls in Bombay really dance the
way they did in Hindi films?

A common view in Pakistan of India was that it was more fun, more
decadent and glitzy. But these perceptions did not make them grow fonder
of India. They admired the supposed successes of modern India, but not
India itself. What they found appealing about India were the
unflattering qualities I mentioned that made India resemble Pakistan, a
nation that was still poor and whose public spaces largely belonged to
the poor, where politicians were corrupt, bridges collapsed and trains
fell into rivers.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
