# What America’s vote tells us about the myth of influence

*2020-11-08*

These past four years, you may have heard that Russia helped Donald
Trump steal the American presidential election in 2016. You may have
heard this from such venerated figures that you may even think of it as
an indisputable fact. There was no “Russian influence” this time, but
the race was very close, and very similar to 2016’s. So what was all the
noise about?

American voters have not transformed in these four years. Trump voters
have largely remained so, and most of those who despise him or his party
have not found a reason to like him. For years, Democrats have won the
popular vote, and that has continued, but the new President, as in 2016,
has won narrowly. If everything is almost the same, what exactly was the
use of all that was done and said since 2016? What did all those
impassioned writers, activists and demonstrators achieve?

That some people influence most people is one of our most influential
ideas. This was true until recently. A handful of journalists, scholars
and activists could influence vast millions. But the age of influence is
over, and the US of 2020 presents further evidence.

People find the news they want to believe and the views they already
subscribe to. We are in a world where prophets don’t create religions;
rather, religions appoint prophets who have the right attributes. The
influencer does not influence anymore; rather, the influencer is the
mascot of an idea that has already taken root due to a complex web of
economic, racial and psychological reasons.

We have moved from the age of influence to the age of corroboration. In
public life today, success is a reward for figures who can validate a
delusion, or a bias. People who are objective and do not have extreme
views are doomed to be modest transmitters of ideas. They will be
healthy for the world, of course, like boiled cauliflower, and as
popular.

Yet, influence is a multi-billion dollar industry. It is a force that
emanates from the long tail of politics, funding thousands of
non-electoral politicians masquerading as journalists, economists,
seers, patriots and humanitarians.

How do people arrive at a belief? We assume that people argue with
themselves before acquiring it. We presume people consider various facts
and opinions and make a Solomon-like judgment after hearing all sides.
This is the most erroneous image we have of ourselves. The fact is we
believe first and then seek arguments to substantiate that belief. In
the older world, where a small bunch of elite males controlled the
media, the influential could infuse both the belief and the arguments.
But in a changed world, where hyper-democracy has created a wide
spectrum of beliefs, the influential have been reduced to corroborators.

Even fake news is popular not because it is transformative, but because
a section of society wants to believe it. As this column once argued,
Trump did not succeed because of fake news; rather, a piece of fake news
succeeded because of Trump. Conspiracy theories, too, exhibit this
character. They do not infect everyone equally. Some people are prone to
a particular kind of conspiracy theory that corroborates an entrenched
belief, while others are immune to it. The immune feel intellectually
superior, but they do not realize they are marinating in a different set
of conspiracy theories. The most effective of these do not look like
one—for instance, the theory that Russia stole the last US election.
This theory was appealing to the old American mainstream media because
it gave them an honourable reason why they had not anticipated a
political revolution. Now a segment of America’s liberal media appears
to concede that the Russian angle was overplayed.

In September, The New Yorker magazine ran an article titled, ‘Is Russian
Meddling as Dangerous as We Think?’ “There’s nothing inherently foreign
about the rise and spread of disinformation. Using the Russian word
dezinformatsia doesn’t make the practice any different from homegrown
falsehoods spread online by Americans targeting other Americans.” The
article does not dispute Russian attempts, but dismisses their impact as
inconsequential.

In a world where propaganda does not transform people the way it used
to, and opinions appear to be innate and immutable, are political
campaigns still relevant ? Intuitively, I cannot accept that there
remains a person in the US who sees an ad or hears a speech or reads a
piece of news and switches his or her political loyalty.

American campaign managers accept that their field of influence has
shrunk significantly over the years. They say that their job now is to
try influencing just a small fraction of the electorate who are
impressionable because most voters are beyond transformation. But they
claim that the millions of dollars that political parties spend on
campaigns and influence is worth it because just a few thousand votes
decide the fate of a presidential election. We will, however, never know
how effective organized influence is on a few thousand undecided voters.

What is more influential than organized campaigns is banal hatred. You
may argue that the influence industry peddles negativity, but discreet,
private hatred is different from the broad conceptual hate that the
influence industry sells. For instance, the hatred that many men harbour
for articulate women like Elizabeth Warren, or for the trappings of
sophistication. In the same way, many voters despise the sanctimonious
intellectual so much that even when he or she says what is right, they
develop an affection for the exact opposite.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
