# What the flaneur leopard says about urban migration

*2020-11-22*

I must first tell you about the leopard. A leopard is a townie. For
decades, the scholarly view has been that the leopard wishes to be in
the forest, and that it encroaches human habitats pushed by
circumstances, like shrinking forests. There is a deeply set view among
modern humans that the leopard “belongs” in the jungle and its forays
into human settlements are acts of desperation or mistakes. So wildlife
officials follow a standard practice: capture the leopard and release it
into the wild. This is also known as a “rescue”.

But, a group of scientists who tagged some “rescued” leopards found out
that the cats returned to the villages and towns, traversing
considerable distances to be with humans, who tend to have an abundance
of tasty dogs, cattle, children and other lumbering prey that are too
lame for the forest, where even the deer puts up a hard fight.

The tagged leopards demonstrated that they not only liked human
settlements, they often lurked only metres from homes.

Humans like to think that there is such a thing as a “natural habitat”.
It’s a convenient anthropocentric view, hence has a religious tone to
it—every animal has its place, close to humans if they are safe and far
away if they are dangerous. According to this idea, wild animals belong
in the forest. But the leopard has shown what humans demonstrated
centuries ago—the natural habitat of an animal is any place that offers
the best quality of life even if such a place harbours inherent risks,
and that it will travel great distances to achieve it.

The behaviour of the leopard may have some lessons for the
sophisticated. That not everything that is displaced is in need of a
“rescue”. That, often what is actually being “rescued” is the rescuer.
That a feral migrant to a town is not always a tragic figure. That, even
though a city is not as ancient as a forest or humans, there is
something natural about the idea of the city, that romanticizing the
village is a pointless exercise.

People, including the poor, like to be where the action is. Mohandas
Gandhi’s love for villages, and his wrong prediction that “the future of
India” would be in its villages, frames a powerful feudal wish of
generations of the Indian elite: They like to cordon off the poor and
the provincial in sanctuaries, and they do this by telling themselves
that a “sanctuary” is a form of paradise. Restricting the rustic poor to
their poverty, modest farming and daily caste insults to fulfil some
fantasy of the elite about village life is what India’s past has
essentially been about.

But then, for decades India’s villagers, especially the poor whose lives
are tough and whose social status is low, have wanted to migrate to the
cities, where there are more opportunities and entertainment, and
anonymity. Alarmed by this, a section of India’s elite has promoted a
view that migration to the cities is a sign that something is wrong.

Migrating leopards also reveal a crucial aspect of violence against
migrants. That an ethical idea may not be as important in keeping the
peace as a practical politician acting in self-interest.

A few years ago, I went to meet some leopards in Junnar, a sugarcane
district about 200 km from Mumbai. At the time of my visit, in 2002,
leopards had attacked 22 people, mostly children, and had consumed
nearly 700 cattle in two-and-a-half years. Nobody counted the dogs that
had gone missing. The people in the region wanted the government to kill
the leopards. The forest officials did what they were supposed to do —
they captured the cats and released them into the forest. But the
leopards kept returning, with friends and lovers. They loved the place.
The sugarcane farms provided a good cover, and as it was one of the most
irrigated places in the state, there was abundant water. And, of course,
there were cattle and dogs.

The villagers wanted the leopard killed not only to save their own
lives, but also to avenge past killings. But forest officials said they
would protect the cats. They asked the villagers to grow sugarcane in
patches to deny leopards vast cover. But then sugarcane is a lucrative
crop and the farmers wanted to grow it on every inch possible. They were
aghast that the government was going great lengths to protect the
leopards. At the time, the compensation for a child’s death caused by a
leopard was <span class="webrupee">₹</span>20,000, and the penalty for
killing the cat was <span class="webrupee">₹</span>25,000.

Soon, politicians entered the arena. The Shiv Sena led demonstrations
demanding the execution of leopards. India’s laws that protected the
animals were exemplary, moral and wise. But the villagers who faced a
threat every day were baffled. And politicians alone had the crudity to
speak up for them. It comforted the villagers. And in the process may
have saved the leopards from organized mass murder.

Leopards don’t vote, so most politicians don’t take their side. Yet,
they continue to thrive in many human settlements across India. It is
possible that a whole generation of leopards has never seen a forest;
they were born in sugarcane farms or vacant hillsides near villages. In
all such places, local politicians still speak the minds of villagers.
As often happens in India, they may not have solved a complex issue, but
they act as vents of anger so that it does not escalate into something
worse.

Time and again, India encounters a man-woke conflict, in a manner of
speaking. A highly ethical global idea, a sophisticated idea, infuriates
simple people who have to bear its consequences. And politicians alone,
in self-interest, say what is unsayable.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
