# There is a reason the rest of India cannot be Kerala

*2020-04-19*

Every time I see Malayalee women, including my mother, hold their
stomachs and laugh, I imagine that someone has told them that Kerala is
a “matriarchal” society. That Kerala is “a matriarchal society” is
nonsense to such a degree that I have stopped believing even elephants
are “matriarchal”.

But many other exceptional qualities that Indians attribute to Kerala
are true. Especially the way the state has fought the covid-19 pandemic,
illuminating for the world outside its advanced and vast healthcare
system for the masses.

If Kerala were a nation, it would be considered a proper middle-income
one that is way more advanced than India. It has among the highest per
capita incomes in South Asia, and its people probably have the best
quality of life. An average farmer in Kerala is so prosperous that if he
commits suicide, our charlatan activists will not claim, blindly as is
their wont, that it was because of “debt”.

So there is this question that people are asking, and not for the first
time: Why can’t the rest of India be more like Kerala?

Kerala does not offer urban fun and its men make drinking seem like a
depressing disease, and it is one long densely populated village filled
with villagers who tend to think like villagers. But it is a very clean
place, the air here seems prehistoric, and every Malayalee appears to
have abundant fresh water, a portion of which women often pour on their
head every morning, and with their hair still wet, they go somewhere in
a tearing rush, as though to meet a hairdryer. Even the cheapest
restaurants have high hygiene standards, all of which must, by law and
tradition, feed you an unlimited amount of rice.

Assured of food, Malayalees have such dignity and an overblown sense of
their rights that they famously make it hell for industries to flourish
in the state. In a year, Kerala loses 200 days to various types of
“hartals” (strikes). Despite this, there is no art-film-grade poverty in
Kerala; everyone has land and a home, and the swag of liberation. It
seems impossible to find a Malayalee maid in Kerala. However, it is a
different matter outside the state.

Malayalees thrive in any capitalistic society outside Kerala performing
even menial tasks if the price is good. Some 35% of Kerala’s income is
from remittances sent by 10% of its population that lives outside India.
They are able to exploit capitalism the way, say, Biharis cannot because
of Kerala’s focus on healthcare and primary education.

In their book An Uncertain Glory, the economists Jean Drèze and Amartya
Sen argue that India only claimed it was a “socialist” country after
independence; it never did two crucial things that most socialist
nations did—invest in primary education and the health of its people.
Kerala did. It was a true socialist republic within a confused republic.

Modern India has been trying to be more like Mumbai. It is raising
congested cities out of villages, shrinking homes, building
amoeba-shaped golf courses for a few and calling it progress. Instead,
maybe India should try to be a Kerala?

It is a pointless ambition because our greatest myth is that a political
system creates a society. The fact is that the character of people makes
some political systems possible. Many times, the political system is an
accident of history, or merely terminology. Like the Communist Party of
India (Marxist), which has ruled Kerala intermittently for decades. It
is hard to say in what way this party is communist.

There certainly was nothing “communist” about the people of Kerala. In
the 80s, Eugene Koshy, who worked for a modest software training school,
hit upon an unremarkable marketing idea that transformed the fortunes of
his company—he promoted the institute with images of American flags and
hamburgers. This is not how “a communist” society is expected to behave.

This is my theory of why Kerala is the way it is. For centuries, its
ports were important nodes in global trade; as a result, some people
prospered very much, the inequality of neighbours was excellent
evangelism for the idea of wealth itself, and a whole society was
intoxicated by entrepreneurship.

Also, as it happens to prosperous entrepôts, there was an assimilation
of many cultures. It was a capitalistic society before such names were
invented. As a result of the mercantile gold age, Christianity and Islam
came to influence the state’s elites. So ownership of capital became
confused, which is always a good sign.

After European trade came European conscience, which, like conscience
today, was a mixture of two selfish forces—a way of assuaging the guilt
of the rich, and a way to bleed your rival through idealism. For
instance, freeing slaves is not only about freeing humans, it is also a
way to hurt those who have a tactical advantage in owning slaves. A
strong reformation movement took hold of Kerala even before
independence, and the idea that the strong should take care of the weak
grew, and from this emerged a generation of aristocratic, idealistic
communist leaders who equated colonialism with capitalism.

Modern Kerala, which is misunderstood as a communist region, is in
reality a post-capitalist state. A lot of things have gone into the
making of its character. Mere policy cannot transform the rest of India
into Kerala.

*In any case, idealistic Kerala survives because the world outside
Kerala is not Kerala.*

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
