# An important but indecent question that has to arise

*2020-03-29*

In every crisis, there is one idea that is sacred, and one question that
is indecent. In the viral pandemic that is underway, the sacred idea is
that the world should be locked down for many weeks, even months. And
the indecent question is: “But what about the economy?” The most
sacrilegious form of the indecent question is: “Has the world
overreacted to the virus?”

The world has not overreacted to the virus. That the priority of any
government is to save human lives and not to make money is a moral code
that suits all of us.

Governments make money from cigarettes and liquor, by taxing them, but
faced with a pandemic, it is somehow indecent to ask whether a dominant
moral idea should come at the expense of financial ruin for billions of
people.

Scientists, capitalists, politicians and writers who have expressed
concern at the shutting down of entire economies have faced a string of
public insults from other scientists, economists, journalists and
probably even devious quants who have shorted everything that could
possibly be short-sold. Insults are dud weapons; even so, most people in
the world fear being insulted.

As often, US President Donald Trump has articulated a thought that is on
the minds of people who run businesses but are too polite to say it: “We
can’t let the cure be worse than the problem.” He announced that he will
open the US for business in a matter of days. A familiar lament
followed. A journalist posed the president an old sanctimonious retort
that masquerades as a question: How many lives will Trump sacrifice for
the economy? (“None,” replied Trump, obviously.)

On Thursday, Sachin Bansal, co-founder of Flipkart, reacted to India’s
relief package for the poor with this tweet: “I hope there’s plan to
eventually get people back to work also”. A self-righteous person with
six followers responded, “I hope there’s a plan to feed people until
they get back to work”. Bansal had to flee with the chant, “Thats most
important right now.”

John Ioannidis, an epidemiologist, wondered in an article if the world
was overreacting to the disease through expensive indefinite lockdowns,
and if nations should instead respond to it the way they do to the flu
and other mysterious viral infections that are as deadly but not famous
enough to have well-recognized names. Public insults from peers
followed. Insults are influential concept-delivery devices, and the
concept they tended to carry in Ioannidis’s case was the argument of
“second-order effects”: the principle that an event has primary
consequences that might be obvious or predictable, but it is hard to
predict the consequences of the consequences.

But then, the same argument can be used to defend the critical nature of
normal economic life. We do not fully know the second-order effects of
shutting down whole nations. Neil Ferguson, an epidemiologist at
Imperial College London who was among the scientists who influenced the
UK to lock itself down, said this about the economic implications:
“We’ll be paying for this year for decades to come.”

Last week in the US, 3.25 million people applied for unemployment
benefits. This is five times the previous weekly record for such
applications, which was in 1982.

Right from the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, there have been two moral
ways of responding. One was the Chinese way, involving a full lockdown,
and the other was the South Korean way of letting most of the economy
run but testing people extensively for infection and tracking down
cases. South Korea appears to have contained the disease as effectively
as China. Japan is another major economy that has not locked down. Nor
is it conducting extensive checks. Yet, Japan is not as seriously
affected as, say, Italy, which has enforced a lockdown.

Many in the lockdown camp seem confused by Japan’s good fortune and
their tone almost suggests they want that country to implode in the
misery of viral deaths just to teach the world a lesson—to lock down.
Meanwhile a lot of spurious “cultural” reasons are being promoted to
explain Japan’s luck: how clean the Japanese are, how often they wash
hands, and so on.

Early in the pandemic, the UK, whose Prime Minister Boris Johnson has
now tested positive for Covid, made a disastrous mistake— in
storytelling. It wanted to keep the country open, and in its search for
a moral reason, it hinted that it was attempting a strategy of herd
immunity— where you let most of the population get infected, and let
some die, but help society overall develop antibodies against the virus.
It was a bad story to tell, as the idea that some deaths are acceptable
easily evokes moral repugnance. Also, we still do not know how long
someone can stay immune to a virus that mutates. The UK’s argument
should unabashedly have focused on sustaining the country’s economy.

All of India has been locked down for the first time in its history.
Road accidents have possibly reduced by a considerable extent over the
past few days. The world appears perplexed by the slow spread of the
disease in India. It could just be that our social inequalities saved
us. The rich, who are the primary carriers of the virus, and the poor do
not go to the same places. But then, at the time of writing this, India
has tested only about 25,000 people. So we don’t know the real numbers.
Maybe we will never know. But in a few weeks, India might claim a great
victory over the virus and open its doors to business. The country may
have no other option.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
