# The appropriate way to feel low in a nation of miseries

*2020-06-21*

The balcony people have been feeling low. It is not quite grief, but
close. It is a half-gloom, they may say, though they do not know what
the other half is. Death is in the air, the future is bleak, there is no
holiday resort to escape to, their old ways are on hold, and cash cannot
make all this go away. An actor with real black hair has killed himself,
and in the middle of all this, China is menacing. Yet, India’s half-rich
and the rich cannot freely express their despair the way the affluent in
other nations can.

India’s threshold for misery is very high. Even in this golden age of
self-absorption, you feel it is somewhat indecent to lament your
half-gloom without a deep sociological or medical reason. By Indian
standards, melancholy is a trivial problem, especially when caused by a
pandemic. After all, here people starve, wail, walk hundreds of
kilometres like prehistoric migrants out of Africa.

Yet, the fact is, sorrow need not always have grand reasons. It usually
does not.

In a nation that never had any street joy or beauty in public spaces,
all that the affluent had was a way of life in their island republic
within a republic where they paid a premium to keep other Indians and
reality out. Now even that respite is on hold. So, they say, they feel a
deep growing sadness of the times within, but are also forced to quickly
add, to save themselves from ridicule, that yes they are lucky, they
have everything, it must be their fault; if they cannot breathe, it must
be their fault because they cannot claim there is a knee on their neck.

Indians have always struggled to understand melancholy that does not
have an earth-shaking reason.

Until recent times, Indians told each other that the rich were unhappy.
They said it with a touch of jubilation. And the rich were other people,
who went in cars. In more than one Malayalam film, the upscale woman
wore a sleeveless blouse, smoked, and stared long at sleeping pills on
her palm at night. We didn’t know the origins of her grief; she was this
way at the start of the film. We were expected to understand that her
problem was the state of being a rich urban woman. The sleeping pill of
the 80s became, in the 90s, Art of Living classes and the philosophies
of J Krishnamurthy.

As Indians prospered and the middle classes behaved more like the rich
than the poor, they grew more sympathetic to the reasonless sorrow. It
did not feel flippant anymore or fleeting, as melancholy never makes its
host feel it is transient; rather, it portends a long tropical marriage.

The new Indians of the 90s wondered if it was all their fault. In their
quest to understand their reasonless sadness, they wondered if it was
some yawning emptiness within. But can any human being really be empty?
We are filled with so much love and hope and fundas and misconceptions.
There is a whole festival going on inside us.

In their pursuit of grand reasons for their sorrow, India’s affluent
often find the wrong grand reasons—like spouses, parents, capitalism and
caste. The fact is many widely-accepted reasons for melancholy are
modest. Like insect bites, gut bacteria, bad food, sloth, and
misunderstanding mad men as philosophers. But the most underrated cause
of contemporary urban sorrow is boredom. I believe that every five years
or so, we die within and become zombies, and we have to do something
extraordinary to rise from the undead. (Some people have babies.)

The Indian requirement of grand reasons for sorrow also makes the rich
perform their most cruel act—attributing wrong causes to the deep grief
of the poor, thus farming the sorrow of the poor for politics. As a
result of this phenomenon, there are demographic fables like “farmer
suicides” that make the balcony people rush to villages and hand out
cheap clothes to “the hands that feed us”, while what the poor are
actually crying out for is what most Indians secretly consider a luxury,
like air-conditioning—an end to inexplicable innate melancholy.

A few days ago, Sushant Singh Rajput, an actor in his early thirties,
was reported to have taken his own life. I wonder if he ever wore a mask
in the pandemic. Surely he did, like the rest of us who wished to live.
But then, the option of an early death was probably weighing on him for
long, too. As he was a successful and famous young man, he was granted
the broad reason “depression”. He did not qualify for other gigantic
sociological reasons. Even so, in the days that followed his death,
people tried to manufacture some worthy causes, like discrimination by
powerful members of the film industry. What Rajput’s death should
instead convey to Indians is that highly-pursued sources of joy, like
success, fame and money, cannot overcome the disease of melancholy.

The actor’s death also conveys a message to those who are not clinically
depressed, who are only mildly melancholic – in effect, most people.
That in this world, everyone feels like a failure. At every rung, there
is a better rung, there is humiliation and dejection. Barring a dozen
odd people in this world, everyone else is probably oppressed; might
even be lost without an oppressor. Even billionaires, who cannot be
oppressed by mere humans, manufacture an excessive fear of disease,
artificial intelligence and sentient machines.

What we possess will not keep us happy for long. Happiness is the
illusion of change, or progression—of zombies rising from the dead every
now and then.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
