# Why India should treat its poor as though they are rich

*2020-05-10*

All Indians are poverty-alleviation experts; their need to depute the
task to the right authorities is often what their tweets, evening chats
and morning walks are all about. India is obsessed with poverty. Most of
our policies are about the eradication of poverty; most of our funds are
dedicated to the poor. That Indians are still poor is not the perplexing
element in this—there will always be the poor as long as there are the
rich, and India’s poor are way better today than the abject poor of our
childhood. What is perplexing is the way India treats its poor. This has
not changed.

Irrespective of whether you are a freelance humanitarian or a freelance
patriot, a fact that is beyond dispute is that the country treats its
poor very badly.

Across India, in the name of fighting a pandemic, India has beaten up
its poor, denied them their livelihood, made them run behind trucks for
food, and forced thousands of families to walk hundreds of kilometres to
their villages, letting some people die on the way. A few days ago, more
than a dozen men travelled inside a cement mixer to escape detection.
You may say, or you may not say but discreetly believe, given the
logician that you are, that poverty has rough consequences, so what is
the surprise? But then, even if we adjust for the misfortunes of
poverty, India tends to treat its poor with a degree of cruelty that
economics and practicality do not justify. This is unnecessary.

How then can India treat its poor better?

The problem is that India treats its poor like they are poor. This is
our central flaw. When India says all Indians are equal, the country is
not entirely being economical with the truth. The trouble is that India
treats all Indians as though they are poor.

The poor, usually, have very low standards for themselves. Most visuals
emanating from covid stories are actually not very shocking for the
poor. Even in peace time, the poor do walk extraordinary distances in
the sun, carrying heavy objects and other humans, if they don’t have a
choice. Even in peace time, they run behind stray buses and travel
inside cement mixers. A vulgar truth of life is that most of what
appears to be misery to us is not so miserable to the immiserated.

These low standards for life and living, while practical, are useless
for a country like India that is on course to be a much better place.
The way forward is not to let the poor set standards for themselves and
the nation. India must set a very high bar for the living standards of
the poor.

As a reporter, I used to frequently encounter an attitude that concerned
air-conditioning. Not about it being a luxury—which it was and still is.
But that the poor do not “deserve” air-conditioning. Not only because
they will not pay for it, but also because they do not expect to be so
well treated.

At the heart of the good that Indians try to do—not only through policy
but also through pious activism—there is this unspoken sense that low
standards “will do” for the poor. India’s very definition of comfort is
a state of being that is inaccessible to the poor. Often, we pay not for
the quality of service, experience, home or education, but for keeping
the poor out.

Low standards for the poor are embedded in all the cures that India
prescribes for poverty. It begins in the faulty middle-class academic
conjecture of what the poor want. There is this overrating of food, a
certain cultural oversensitivity to the act of eating. It is not a
surprise that the moment there is a crisis, the government announces
that every poor person will get two bags of starch.

The poor themselves have been demonstrating standards of living that are
somewhat higher. The poor routinely reject the low-quality schools that
many state governments build for their poor, and instead splurge on
superior schools. Many long-distance walkers of the pandemic, for
instance, dragged suitcases with wheels. I am not saying suitcases with
wheels are a sign of new wealth, but they represent a visual of poverty
that is very different from governmental and journalistic projections.

People who are not poor are constantly guessing what being poor might be
like. And the poor play along, trying to guess the right things they
must say to satisfy those who ask.

The problem with conjecture is that it is a talent; to guess a whole
experience you have never endured is a talent, and most people do not
have this intuition. As a result, they have wrong perceptions of
poverty, and they keep lowering standards for the poor to such levels
that they unknowingly start treating the poor like some other species.
For instance, the notion that what the poor need is food, food and more
food.

Here is a suggestion. India should instead treat its poor as though they
form the country’s upper middle class. This might seem ludicrous at
first glance, but when we come down to what it would imply, the idea is
much simpler to comprehend.

For a start, the police should not hit the poor at will. Cops don’t hit
you, as you could testify, so we know that this is possible. Also, don’t
make schools for them that are useless; nor hospitals that are filthy.
Kerala and the Delhi government have demonstrated that this is also
possible. Give them expansive playgrounds and nature and beauty. Many of
them grew up in exquisite places, after all. And let them travel in
great comfort. The Delhi Metro, and the metro systems of many other
cities, have shown that this, too, is possible. And that if you treat
the poor well, the poor will follow all the rules. It is in the nature
of the poor to love the government.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
