# The most successful anti-government protests yet

*2020-01-26*

About three years ago, after millions of Indians were told by their
Prime Minister that their high-denomination currency notes were
worthless and had to be exchanged at the bank, which did not have enough
new notes to exchange, there were no riots. There was probably not even
a protest that was substantial enough to block traffic.

Last year, when the Supreme Court gave away the land on which the 16th
century Babri Masjid once stood to Hindus, Muslims did not erupt in
violence, or mass protests.

How then has an amendment to a law on undocumented foreigners inspired
the most successful protests yet against Narendra Modi and his Bharatiya
Janata Party (BJP)?

Let us first understand the success of the protests, which are still
underway. It would be naive to assume that they will diminish the
electoral worth of the BJP immediately. If there were any short-term
impact at all, the party will gain because the protests serve as an
advertisement to a large segment of the Hindus that the BJP is bent on
eliminating competition from undocumented Muslims for resources and
jobs. But then, even for an Indian political party, elections are not
everything.

The global prestige of the party appears to have been damaged. All the
exaggerations that its foes had conjured up over the years have a ring
of truth now in global perception. Many aspects of the protests are
attractive to an influential Western liberal audience. For instance, the
fact and the fable that women (in exotic traditional costumes) are
driving the protests. All this has caught the attention of the
money-bags. In fact, several Western investors have adopted the language
of righteous columnists in describing “the situation” in India.
Suddenly, India is not a stable place with a strong government in
control. The protests mark the beginning of India’s global notoriety.

Why has this happened now? Why has the BJP’s new immigration policy
inspired protests of this scale, depth, impact and endurance that its
other contentious policies could not create?

Let us look at two events that had the potential to create great organic
tumult but passed by without adversely affecting the
BJP—“demonetization” and the Supreme Court’s verdict on the Ayodhya
dispute. The immediate aftermath of “demonetization” was distorted by
the news media. At first, it was not as unpopular as the English press
claimed. The average Indian thought the rich Indian must be suffering
many times more than him. Some politicians even conveyed to the poor
that they did not have to return the loans they had taken from greedy
moneylenders. Politicians also chased away collection agents of banks
who came to collect loan repayments from small borrowers. Also, there
was no simple moral story that could seriously counter the simple moral
of “demonetization”. By the time the public began to feel enraged, the
government had resolved the cash crunch.

Also, Modi’s popularity was very high in that period. No other Prime
Minister could have denied Indians access to their own cash and gotten
away.

The loss of the land on which the Babri Masjid stood must have hurt
Muslims, but politicians on all sides behaved in an exemplary manner.
Most Muslim leaders beseeched the community to respect the court’s
decision. Modi, in an admirable move, asked people not to celebrate the
verdict.

The amendment of the Citizenship Act is a very different matter. On
this, the BJP has no moral defence. What defence can there be for
discriminating against people, even if they are undocumented foreigners,
on the basis of their religion?

The BJP’s behaviour in this matter is odd and fascinating. This column
has earlier argued that the amended Act is chiefly about favouring all
poor Indians at the expense of undocumented Muslim immigrants, a policy
whose prose is crass but holds in its heart a substantial economic
argument. I do not believe that the BJP wishes to antagonize Indian
Muslims at all. It gains nothing from it. The time for that method of
play is long gone. It is an obsolete argument against the BJP. “No one
can dare touch any Indian Muslim,” Union defence minister Rajnath Singh
said a few days ago, reflecting what I believe is the honest position of
his party in its new avatar, that it does care for India’s Muslims.
Also, it is ridiculous to believe that the BJP wants to find ways to
disenfranchise over 200 million Muslims. So what is going on? Why is it
that the BJP, in its attempt to favour India’s poor, is unable to see
why it is so wrong to single out Muslims among undocumented immigrants?

The BJP’s behaviour reminds me of a day when a billionaire walked into a
meeting of journalists and taunted them for being “very negative”. “If
you wish to criticize to fulfil your need to be negative,” he said,
“don’t criticize Indian politicians, criticize people who don’t matter,
criticize foreign politicians. Criticize Greece or something.”

The BJP appears to feel that it is alright to overtly discriminate
against “foreign” Muslims. The party seems to think, or perhaps thought,
it is safe to pick a fight with them. But this has been a miscalculation
of how humans and the world operate. The policy has misrepresented the
Indian government as a foe of Muslims, and made Indian Muslims who have
very little in the way of documentation feel more insecure than before,
which a wide spectrum of politicians and the long activist tail of
politics have been able to exploit.

*\*Manu Joseph is a journalist and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous*
