# The kind of corruption that could do India a good turn

*2020-10-04*

As an Indian, I had many villains in my life, but the only ones I spoke
to were autorickshaw drivers. As you know, they always demanded “extra
over the meter”. So to annoy them, I would place ten rupees “over” the
physical meter. I imagined that the middle-class fury at their attempt
to fleece us was a reasonable moral response. Until I visited a
first-world nation for the very first time—Japan. The taxi fare from the
airport to the hotel was my week’s wage; public transport was many times
more expensive than Indian taxi fare. And the simple truth occurred to
me that auto fares in India were ridiculously low and designed to keep
the driver poor to the advantage of people who were richer than him, and
his overcharging was a natural compensation for an economic design flaw.

Something is wrong with what we think is right. Many of our moral
expectations are absurd. Why did Indians flay Sachin Tendulkar for
seeking a waiver on customs duties on a Ferrari he received as a gift
when most of us also seek tax exemptions? Wasn’t the anti-corruption
movement merely a war between bribe-takers and bribe-givers? Isn’t there
something unconvincing about our own self-loathing over bribery,
corruption or being “too broadminded” in other ways?

We have been trained to chant that all of India’s problems emerge from
corruption. But the nation in plain sight tells us a very different
story. That not all forms of corruption are the same, and some forms of
it might even be beneficial. In an ideal world, there should be no
corruption at all, but an ideal world wouldn’t have human beings.

In her book China’s *Gilded Age: The Paradox of Economic Boom and Vast
Corruption*, Yuen Yuen Ang, who is a “political scientist”, says that
there are four broad types of corruption. Petty theft, grand theft,
speed money and access money.

Petty theft and speed money are committed by the non-elites, while grand
theft and access money are monopolies of the rich. Petty theft is the
corruption of low-level government officials and minor politicians.
Grand theft is the much larger embezzlement of public funds by major
politicians and powerful bureaucrats. Speed money is the bribe that
citizens pay to access services that are meant for them. Access money,
Ang says, are the “massive bribes” businesses pay to get lucrative
deals, approvals and bailouts.

In India, we have been trained to believe that access money is the worst
form of corruption because it entails huge amounts and involves the most
powerful people. But, Ang argues, China has continued to prosper despite
corruption because its primary form of corruption is access money. In
fact, Ang says, access money is beneficial to economic progress. “While
corruption is never good, not all forms of corruption are equally bad
for the economy, nor do they cause the same kind of harm.”

Ang says that access money has locked China’s top bureaucracy in a
competition to attract investment. A by-product of this system of greed
is swift, wide and deep prosperity. Also, at times access money does not
deny another person’s right to do business or disadvantage others.
Often, it is a price paid for the creation of something new, which may
not have existed otherwise. A refinery perhaps, or a bullet train
venture. This is why Ang says access money, while harmful, does less
harm than other forms of corruption.

Petty theft and speed money rob the poor, make civil rights and
entrepreneurship costly, and give low-level officials a powerful
motivation to continue this unfair system. Grand theft conducts this at
a much larger level. But access money, Ang says, brings huge
investments.

In any system that works, there is a role for a thug. The thug ensures
order by getting rid of other thugs. When the power of the prime thug is
ambiguous, it means the system is not working well. Government itself is
a benign thug. In a well-governed society, the government, in return for
protection money, protects people who in turn are happy to pay up in the
form of taxes. Even in the universe of bribes, there is a system of
thugs. A superior bribery system can abolish all other competing modes
of corruption. The access-money system is that primary thug of
corruption in China, as it motivates powerful officials to terminate
other forms of corruption. This is why, Ang says, compared to India,
China has very little petty theft, grand theft or speed money.

This present condition of China, she says, is very similar to the gilded
age of the US, the late 19th century, when it graduated from chaotic
forms to a higher form of corruption, the system of access money. Parts
of that system were legalized.

Many things that a nation terms bad may actually be useful to it.
Private enterprise, for example, during our destructive socialist era of
economic idealism. In 2003, Arun Shourie, who has battled corporate
corruption all his life, said that Indians should thank industrialists
like Dhirubhai Ambani “not once but twice over” because “by exceeding
the limits in which those restrictions sought to impound them, they
helped create the case for scrapping those regulations, they helped make
the case for reforms.”

India’s curse is that its access money system has not been able to
abolish other forms of more harmful corruption. Across India,
politicians and officials at lower rungs harm Indians through petty
theft and speed money. Sophisticated politicians and officials who
conduct grand theft or thrive on access money have not yet created
order. In India, corruption is still in its chaos phase.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
