# Why foes of India’s ruling party may be right this time

*2020-01-12*

People who are not very fond of Prime Minister Narendra Modi have been
melodramatic, naive or plain wrong in their reactions to his policies,
many of which were not even his ideas.

Their campaign against Aadhaar, which has transformed the lives of the
poor despite its early glitches, was at first led by rural affairs
middlemen, who were fighting for their own relevance in a changing
world. Also, contrary to what such people claim, “demonetization” did
destroy the value of illicit money, and the fact that 99.5% of the
cancelled cash was returned to banks did not mean that the value of the
illicit cash was not degraded before it was returned through proxies.
And, their biases prevent them from seeing the fact that the full
integration of Kashmir with India contained within its many consequences
the liberation of ordinary Kashmiris from their corrupt, well-networked
intellectuals. And that the abolition of triple-talaq probably had the
support of a majority of Muslim women, at least in social circles that
are most affected by such a facile form of divorce. And, activists who
call Modi a “fascist” are usually the same serfs of a dominant culture
that labels unfamiliar humans by a puerile template—as either saints or
“fascists”, or both, as Aung San Suu Kyi discovered.

But the people who are battling Modi over his government’s new
citizenship law are right about almost everything they say about his
immigration policy, which uses Islam to disqualify a broad segment of
undocumented immigrants.

A few days ago, the subject text of an email newsletter from the Prime
Minister’s office read: “PM disburses
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>12,000 crore to six crore farmers
directly in their bank accounts.” This is the sort of thing Modi wants
to do with greater frequency—wire cash directly into the accounts of
voters. The amended Citizenship Act, or CAA, as it is widely known, is
intended to favour poor Indians at the expense of undocumented
foreigners. It belongs to one of the two reformation methods that India
has witnessed in recent years. One that works, and the other that sounds
sexy in the beginning: The Delhi Metro Way of transforming India, and
the Demonetization Way.

The Delhi Metro way of reformation is driven by the unglamorous and
difficult task of creating infrastructure first and implementing
intelligent designs that make it easy for Indians to follow rules before
the grand act of announcing the system’s success. The Delhi Metro first
won the respect of Indians by granting them their rights before telling
them about the consequences of violating their duties to the nation.

But the CAA is in the league of government policies that are more about
grand announcements made without undertaking the dull tasks of creating
processes, explaining stuff, reassuring the weak and the nervous, and
winning the trust and respect of Indians. The Act says the exciting
things first; then fumbles to answer “how” it will be achieved. Why
legislate on citizenship when it is still unclear what set of clinching
documents would confirm the citizenship of a poor Indian?

The Delhi Metro Way assumes policy is not an idea; rather, policy is
implementation of an idea. The Demonetization Way has the swag of a
sensational announcement that precedes figuring out boring stuff like
how to put new cash in old boxes.

Also, India’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) seems at risk of
falling into a feedback black hole. I like to call it “the Ram Gopal
Varma black hole”. When a person is constantly criticized for his bold
ideas, but these keep working, he finds it hard to respect the
collective wisdom of the world. Then, when his instincts fail him and he
makes bad decisions, he continues to disrespect external voices. Arvind
Kejriwal appears to have fallen into such a hole. The BJP is now
circling one. When should politicians whose instincts are far superior
to those of commentators listen to other voices, especially those that
have been wrong or dishonest so many times?

Nothing else explains the baffling stubbornness of the BJP in the face
of obvious problems with the CAA. It is as if the party is unable to see
the fact that a nation like India cannot discriminate even against
foreigners on the basis of their religion. Even Israel does not have a
citizenship policy that officially disqualifies those of a particular
faith.

Also, there are things the BJP should not do precisely because it is the
BJP. Its whole history makes Indian Muslims suspicious. And, the party
has announced a string of policies that have greatly affected the lives
and minds of Muslims. If the BJP is unconcerned about its image as an
organization that has contempt for Muslims, and if this attitude emerges
from its electoral charm with Hindus, then it must ask itself this
political question: Why is there no political party in the world that
claims to represent men?

A political current needs a wound. Of late, men are plagiarizing the
movements of the weak to claim victimhood. Donald Trump does try to
frame men as a single collective organism under attack. But it is very
hard to sculpt a political bloc out of a broad group of dominant humans.
Even women in advanced democracies have not managed to convert
themselves into a formidable political bloc. So, the Hindu consolidation
that the BJP has enjoyed may be momentary. The party has to find newer
ways to define itself, more modern ways, even as its foes have
successfully created a global perception that India is morally superior
to the BJP.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
