# India’s immense political stamina for useless issues

*2020-02-02*

Three weeks in January I was in New Zealand, a place of such relentless
pastoral beauty that its stray patches of ugliness turned out to be golf
courses. There was so much street joy, as people kissed, ran, biked and
hiked. From there, if you followed the most important news in India, you
would think India, too, has solved all its problems of basic survival
and is therefore obsessed with useless issues.

The truth, though, is that our air is poison, we are stranded for half
our lives in traffic congestion, we lurk in utter spatial ugliness and
chaos. Our children grow up with very low national self-esteem. Usually,
nations look richer than they are in reality; India, in plain sight, is
poorer than what bank accounts suggest. Yet, the greatest public outrage
is reserved for esoteric matters, issues that are not about the quality
of life; that will, in fact, only make living here worse.

Friday night, in a posh Gurgaon club called Quorum, I asked politician
Subramanian Swamy, who had just announced to his audience that he was
the “second most popular man in the \[Bharatiya Janata Party\]”, why
this was so. Why do we have such immense political stamina for useless
issues?

He understood the spirit of what I meant by “useless”—issues that will
not improve the lives and prospects of most Indians. Religious and other
cultural identities are primarily the domain of the upper classes, which
hold all the cards. How then have they transmitted this disease of
identity so easily down the classes? How is it that a Subramanian Swamy
has got a Kanhaiya Kumar embroiled in the same useless debates around
identity?

Swamy told me, correctly, that identity is not a trivial thing, that
religious, caste or national identity matters to a vast section of
Indians. But then, that was not the substance of my question. “Why” was
my question. Why is it that a majority of the nation that lives in
appalling conditions wastes its political energies on issues that hardly
matter to their lives? Why don’t people agitate for air-conditioned
transport and water and electricity and free schools more often than
they do for esoteric things? Or, at least peacefully vote for these
issues, as the people of Delhi have begun to do recently, since the
advent of the Aam Aadmi Party?

Some powerful forces are at play, apart from the most obvious element,
which is that the upper classes have a disproportionate control over
storytelling. The fundamental nature of stories and storytellers, too,
is responsible.

A story is a very corrupt thing. A story is not an event, but an
interesting event. And, here lies its deviousness. What is interesting
in a story is not what is important in life. At times, the two do meet,
but that is very rare.

This is why politics is the way it is and why democracy itself may be
doomed in the long run. The most captivating stories are not necessarily
true, nor what will make our lives better. People “identify” with
stories not out of wisdom or clarity, but impelled by that highly
influential force—misunderstanding. Clarity is often inconvenient, while
misunderstanding is a pleasurable massage of prejudice.

Far more important is the nature of storytellers. The edginess of a good
storyteller does not emerge from virtues like sanity, sobriety, clarity
and stability. The mad, the melancholic, the enraged and the innately
melodramatic tell the best stories. They are too good for more sober or
moral storytellers who try to win people over through common sense, say,
through the promise of better infrastructure, schools and hospitals.

Even politicians who know the game, who try hard to be interesting and
dramatic only to achieve moral ends, eventually get caught in the
process of storytelling, and fail to reach their end.

But can’t issues co-exist? Can’t religious identity co-exist with duller
things like infrastructure? The problem, as we see in India, is that
political focus is a zero-sum game; the political stamina of the public
is finite. Everything is at the expense of something else. Dull but
transformative issues, like matters that affect the quality of life,
often cannot compete with religion or caste.

There is a parallel in India’s space programme. Its fans raised a
question right at the start, when its morality in a poor country was
challenged: Why can’t a space programme co-exist with the eradication of
malaria? Should a nation wait to kill all its mosquitoes before it sends
metal to space? But then, considering that rocket science is easier than
eradicating poverty or malaria, we arrive at the very reason why
societies do some sexy things—to hide their failures in more substantial
and difficult ventures.

The exotic issues of Indian politics exist not because Indians so love
their culture. They exist because it is easier to demolish a mosque or
build a temple than it is to enrich India or even enforce intelligent
road design. But then, isn’t it true that matters of great relevance can
hide within esoteric issues? For instance, support for the government’s
discrimination of foreign Muslims is more about a fear of the economic
immigrant than Islam.

True, issues of identity and culture often conceal more practical
matters. But then why do we hide important things in less important
things? That, in essence, is our problem. I hope that one day a cunning
patriotic humanitarian billionaire will create breakthrough visual
effects that will create the illusion of god, who will then order
Indians to drive in their lanes and keep the nation clean.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
