# Ordinary people are a lot smarter than made out to be

*2020-08-30*

I hope young Indian celebrities who are considering suicide will drop
the idea after watching the ongoing feeding frenzy around the death of
Sushant Singh Rajput. I do not have clinching arguments about why those
who wish to die must instead live, still I am on the side of life, even
if life includes television news.

Over the past few weeks, some actors, professional gossipers and alleged
news channels have been trying to frame the actor’s death as murder.
They have unearthed black magic, drugs, and even the role of his former
girlfriend, actor Rhea Chakraborty, whom they accused of manipulating
him in supernatural and scientific ways.

At first glance, it may appear that the Rajput news cycle is further
evidence that most of the world is not very smart. After word got out
that Chakraborty had said Rajput’s mental illness included
claustrophobia, some people circulated images of him in the cockpit of a
plane, and of him in a space suit. People also posted news of his visit
to Nasa. Not only to suggest he was not claustrophobic. Indians
associate even a visit to Nasa as a sign of intelligence, and
intelligence in India includes sanity.

News channels that have a reputation of being more sophisticated and are
watched by people who eat asparagus, were not above the farce. On one,
when Rhea promoted the idea that “Me-Too” allegations against him may
have pushed him off the brink, the anchor was not comfortable with this
angle and kept steering the conversation towards drugs. One has to
marvel at handlers of the “Me-Too” campaign. Several depressed men have
killed themselves after stating that false allegations of sexual
predation were the reason for their action. But a whole nation in search
of a “cause” for an actor’s death is somehow herded by a cosmic hand
away from the fact that Rajput was a “Me-Too” accused, and that he had
claimed it was a false allegation, and that such an allegation against a
suicidal man is deadlier than black magic or professional
marginalization.

You may say it is futile to search for sense in most of what the world
does. There seems to be civilizational wisdom in the view of the
mainstream modern world that this nonsensical cycle of news about Rajput
has come about because most humans lack sense, that they are naive, and
that the capitalism of the news business is merely serving up a product
that has wide acceptance.

This is not true. People are smarter than those whose job it is to
predict what people want. The world is smarter than the media.

It may appear that most of the nation has been taken in by news about
Rajput, but that is because the garrulous make a disproportionate
contribution to the noise. Ordinary people are far more rational and
intelligent and even wiser than they are made out to be. They are, of
course, entertained by the defamation of a beautiful young woman. But
then, people have the capacity to be entertained and simultaneously
discard the news.

The abstract fields of media, academics and art constantly make
assumptions that the collective intelligence of humanity is very low.
For example, we are told that Indians don’t deserve swanky public
utilities because they are so poor they will deface or pilfer them; that
most people like mindless cinema and dim books, and that without violent
cops the whole nation would collapse into barbaric anarchy. Yet, every
time Indians were offered a high-quality service, they have respected
and cared for it. Like the Delhi Metro system, where Delhi behaves with
very different civic values than in the Delhi outside the transit
tunnels.

Also, it is India’s vast semi-literate masses that have sustained
electoral democracy, simply by going out to vote during the years when
the elite longed for “a benign dictator”; and India’s masses, for all
their electoral flaws, have constantly improved politics. In fact, if it
were not for the outsized influence of India’s middle class over the
media, the poor may have improved the quality of politicians even more.
And it is the vast masses who quietly bore the brunt of “demonetization”
without breaking into riots even when their own money was denied to them
for many weeks. And, years later, when covid broke out, they maintained
order even as a government made confused and unreasonable demands of
them. Also, most third-rate commercial films in all Indian languages
have failed miserably. The success of the few hits among them have been
analysed poorly. A commercial film succeeds not because of its lack of
intelligence, but because of its other qualities.

Even so, I accept that it is naive to be too infatuated by the virtues
of crowds. As this column has earlier argued, any idea that overrates
human intelligence will fail. In the ongoing media farce around Rajput’s
death, there is some complicity of a crowd of ordinary people. But even
these large numbers are a small part of the world. Even in these times,
the most common attributes of the sane are silence and invisibility.

In any case, it is the sophisticates who taught others the power of
ascribing spurious reasons to a suicide when they converted the deaths
of farmers and a Dalit student into political movements. The foolishness
of the Rajput news cycle that places excessive importance on “the cause”
of suicide is no different from frequent claims that Indian farmers
could not have died of depression. All too often, what is frivolous and
wrong evolves out of what was once serious and wrong.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
