# It was the idea of debt that created the modern world

*2020-09-06*

In return for your time, allow me to offer you the surprise that
everything we were told about barter might be wrong.

That barter preceded the invention of money, and that barter was the
“economic system” of ancient civilizations might be one of the great
fake stories of all time. An extraordinary book, *Debt: The first 5000
years*, by the anthropologist David Graeber suggests that the most
famous evangelist of capitalism, Adam Smith, was the most influential
originator of that fable, and that Smith may have cooked up stories of
“savages” who practised barter. Since Smith’s era, scholars have set out
to find evidence of barter as a primitive alternative to money. “But to
this day,” Graeber writes, “no one has been able to locate a part of the
world where the ordinary mode of economic transaction between neighbours
takes the form of ‘I’ll give you twenty chickens for that cow’.”

In the history of the world, there was definitely barter, but it did not
precede money, nor was it practised the way many economists have
claimed. Barter was never within a settlement, nor among neighbours.
Rather, it was among strangers who did not have access to the same
resources.

Graeber argues that in an ancient village, a man who wanted cows had no
reason not to farm cattle and instead keep chicken, and a man who wanted
flour had no reason not to cultivate wheat. Everyone grew what they
wanted to consume with the help of inputs that were available to all.

What goods then could neighbours exchange? It was more likely that an
outsider hailing from an arid village of, say, weavers, who loved cashew
nuts but had no means to cultivate them, and did not possess the
currency of cashew-growers but had a lot of silk to offer, would make
the trade. According to Graeber, barter was often a truce before
imminent war. But money, in some form or another, was older and far more
prevalent than barter. Money comes naturally to humans. Like speaking.
We did not require the inconvenience of barter.

Graeber, ironically, is better known as a passionate foe of money, an
anarchist who was involved in a major way in organizing the “Occupy Wall
Street” movement about a decade ago, and exactly the kind of activist
who gives me no cause for joy, a rich-world beneficiary of capitalism
who rages against capitalism.

But to me, he will primarily always be the author of a treasured book
which shows that the most humane thing a humanitarian can do is not stir
up facile anarchy, but painstakingly create a great scholarly work that
is beyond the means of mere greed. I don’t know why leftists write
better books than people I get along with. On Thursday, he died in a
hospital in Venice. The cause of his death was not known at the time of
filing this column.

Graeber makes a persuasive argument that money emerged from debt;
morality emerged from the successful fable of creditors that a debt had
to be repaid; and most strife emerged from default. The modern world
emerged from the notion that humans owed their lives to the gods, to the
king, to their parents, to their masters, and to their gurus. Life
continues in this manner, as a persistence of debt. Conservatism is
about paying your debts; all rebellion is about the right to default.

In the film Moonstruck, an old woman whose husband is having an affair
asks a younger man, “Why do men chase women?”

And the younger man says, “God took a rib from Adam and made Eve. Now
maybe men chase women to get the rib back.”

Debt is a bit like that rib. Debt is a hole where there was once
something. What there was before the hole, we have long forgotten. This
may be why humanitarians, whether they know it or not, are instinctively
opposed to the idea of obligations, and they appear to always clamour
for rights. Obligations emerge from the idea of innate debt, a sort of
primordial debt.

What does money measure? Graeber says money is always a measure of debt,
an on-going transferable IOUs in every sovereign nation that some
signatory promises to repay. This debt is an ancient rib that everyone
has forgotten but its hole is in the heart of all life. The moment a
central bank decides to repay its debt, the whole monetary system will
lose meaning.

Centuries before the complexity of modern money, the connection between
debt and money was easier to see. Why did ancient kings impose taxes?
After all, a king owned everything, or at least he could take everything
in his kingdom by force. He did not really need tax revenues. Graeber
points out that kings introduced taxes to create an object that people
owed him—to be precise, kings created tax to create money. Money, as a
transferrable token of debt, simplified matters for the king. For
instance, instead of feeding vast armies, a king could let soldiers feed
themselves at local inns using the sovereign tokens he had issued, which
in turn had value for inn-keepers only because they had to pay their
king taxes in those tokens. In essence, in the beginning, people did not
sell money to buy food; they sold food to buy money.

When I first read this book, I enjoyed it so much I felt I must repay
the author in some meaningful way, beyond the mere price of a book. That
sentiment is at the heart of Graeber’s Debt. We have been conditioned
for centuries to imagine that a moment of joy and beauty is a debt that
we need to repay, somehow, in some form. But then, we owe nothing for
the joys of living, not even to David Graeber.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
