# It’s clear that people miss having other people around

*2020-06-14*

People have been missing people. Not just remote lovers, friends,
siblings and parents, but they are missing what we usually mean when we
say “people”—those strangers who make up the hum and the din and the
whole backdrop of life. The extras in the gripping story about us, who
murmured in cafes as we spoke to someone more important, and whose
bodies and laughter we needed in a movie hall, but whom we despised for
the long queue for popcorn, and for the traffic on the road, for
crowding trains, filthy loos, and for their weddings, for blocking hotel
reservations, raising airfares and ruining our air, and whom we wished
to kill before birth through pious population control policies.

The government has backed off a bit from our lives, chiefly because it
is unable to pretend that it knows what it is doing, and now we can go
almost anywhere we want. But we are still cautious. Death by covid is a
bit like cancer—people covertly blame you for it. So we are not fully
back yet to the way we were before. As a result, we are not there for
the strangers, as their backdrops in cafes, just as they too have
vanished from ours.

In the exquisite TV series Fleabag, Fleabag tells an older woman that
most people, “are shit”. And the older woman says the most beautiful
thing: “People are all we’ve got.”

And that is what the pandemic has reminded us. People are all we have
got. Including the secret lovers of tyrants and the sanctimonious
charlatans. They are the energy we feed off. When we sustained our
longest lie—that we love diversity, not only in forests but also in
humans—what we originally meant was that we want diversity in the extras
who make up the backdrop of our stories, for aesthetic reasons, so long
as the diversity was not too glaring.

As great cities emptied out for our pandemic, we at first enjoyed the
gaping emptiness and silence. People across the world celebrated images
of animals taking over roads; even Indians pretended it was something
unusual. And images of dolphins in urban waters with spurious captions
became popular. But soon we could see the gloom in the emptiness. Peace,
yes, but who would have thought peace would be so melancholic? The bleak
can marinate in the calm and stillness for weeks, but most people find
happiness in the buzz of activity. If I may paraphrase a timeless lament
of an anonymous lover: We are miserable without people, it is almost
like having them around.

Indians are more attuned to the energy of the crowd. It’s not only
because of our massive population. Congestion is often a consequence of
poor infrastructure. That is why we resent the crowd. Not the
monoculture of a concert crowd, or a theatre crowd, but of the crush of
poor desperate humans everywhere else.

Yet, when we used to visit advanced countries, after the first few days
of appreciation, something in us died when we saw their hollow exquisite
towns. The act of driving miles without seeing any human makes many
Indians feel they are at the start of a bad apocalypse movie. And we get
unsettled not only by their highways, but also towns.

I remember when I first visited Edinburgh, I wondered if there had been
some calamity—where were the people? The city was a cluster of beautiful
buildings, but where were the people? Where were the extras to fill
desolate beautiful lanes and cafes?

When those extras visit India for the first time, especially Mumbai,
they, too, might think there has been a calamity—they have never seen so
many people, and people in Mumbai going about life resemble people
fleeing a natural calamity.

When I was in my 20s, I used to be suspicious of the kind of people who
said, “I love books” or “I love films”. They behaved as though all books
and films were the same, a single collective organism, even though they
can surely like only a small fraction of them. But now I get that what
those lovers of books and films were marvelling at was the crowd of
stories, the extras that form a backdrop. People say, “I love books” or
“I love films” because they are too proud to say, “I love people”.

It is for all these reasons that I feel the talk about work-from-home
and how the office will never return to its old power is a bit of
nonsense. People are behaving as though internet conferencing was
invented this month. The technology to turn the office obsolete has been
around for years. But the office has survived for a good reason.

Work is mostly about companionship. Also, as a Silicon Valley guru
pointed out recently, people are able to work well through video
conferencing only because they have already built social connections in
the real world.

A few years ago, a man came up with a drink called Soylent, which was a
powder that had all the nutrients a body needed. You mix it with water
and drink it. It is probably a more complete meal than conventional
food. People who sampled it, who replaced regular meals with Soylent
encountered a few problems. The most severe was not its taste. It was
time.

They suddenly had too much time on their hands. We forget what eating is
actually about—it is about people. From reading about food, talking
about it, foraging for it in markets and cooking to the actual act of
consumption, food is not really about eating, just as religion is not
quite about God. In the same way, work is not about work.

Everything we do is about people—only the excuse changes.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
