# Why the country’s new plan for education is smart

*2020-08-02*

Every time I see a new underpass, I get a bit emotional. An underpass
does not win elections. Why do politicians do these little good things?
Why do bureaucrats do their jobs? The loudest Indian lament is that the
government is lousy at its job; but the greatest mystery is why some
good things happen in India in the first place.

You may say an underpass generates illicit cash down a whole chain of
practical men. I am a big admirer of self-interest as the most
influential force of good, but still I don’t think greed is a complete
theory that fully explains the origins of good deeds. Maybe, like many
other things in India, nobody fully knows why they do what they do, even
when it is good. The mystery lingers not only in small things, like
underpasses, but also in some major policies. The country’s new
education policy, for instance.

National guidelines, for the first time in over three decades, to
transform how Indians learn has such a long arc and its impact so
widespread, that it does not affect the career of any professional
politician or bureaucrat. There are evidently some cultural motives in
the policy, but they do not run too deep. The guidelines are a reminder
that the instinct of most humans, including Indians, is to make their
tribe better.

Here are some reasons why I like the new education policy:

The vernacular-speaking Indian’s quarrel with the English language is
easing: Among the significant recommendations of the policy is that the
medium of instruction for primary school children be their mother tongue
or the regional language where the school is located. While this is not
mandatory, it may appear, at first glance, to be an extension of that
tiring war that provincial politicians and cultural figures wage against
English. But I see this as a truce, and even a concession of our culture
hawks that English is too useful to be denied to students beyond their
early formative years.

The suave Westernised Indian has receded in public life, and the
non-English speaking Indian is rising. Even so, the guardians, champions
and beneficiaries of Indian culture have faced a problem—their cultural
wares, languages especially, have not been of use to the young. Without
being of material use, a cultural colonizer will merely get physical
territory and not people’s minds.

After how many years of being useful to a society does a foreign
language become native? Maybe Indian cultural figures are beginning to
accept an answer—“around now”. That’s what I see in the feeble and
ambiguous recommendation to use regional languages as a medium of
instruction in primary schools. What is left unsaid is the inevitability
of English beyond that phase.

The eclipse of English in early education is actually a good idea for a
majority of Indian students. In the lives of upscale kids, English is in
the air. As a result, it becomes their dominant language. But a majority
of Indian children struggle to pick up English in the “good” schools
where their ambitious parents put them. As a result, they struggle to
grasp the basics of all subjects, as we witnessed with “slum children”
in our own school days.

India accepts the true meaning of “vocation”: When I was a boy,
“vocation” meant something bleak that students who failed in science and
maths did with their lives. In reality, a vocation is what a person is
best suited to do, and what one truly wants to do. The most
extraordinary aspect of the new education policy is the respect it
accords various intelligent activities like carpentry and plumbing, and
their being ushered into the mainstream.

I am reminded of the bad luck of some boys I grew up with. They were
great mechanics but were made to feel dumb and useless because they
could not spell “mechanic” in English or take a “rhombus” seriously. We
have lost millions of childhoods to a poor analysis of the meaning of
intelligence and education. By bringing “vocation” into the mainstream,
India has, at least in theory, taken an opportunity to liberate itself
from the dark ages of colonial education.

Until now in India, what was considered formal school education was
separate from what was considered vocational. The new policy attempts to
change that. I see the introduction of computer coding in primary school
not as something esoteric, but as something that is in line with the
merging of education and “vocational training”.

The liberation from education: The proposed flexibility of college
students to leave college midway, pursue a job and return to resume
education is not only intelligent, but also one of the most humane ideas
India has tried. Unlike the influential middle class, most Indians have
a bad start to their lives. Their families and finances are unsteady.
They give up the idea of college or suffer through a three- or four-year
entrapment in pursuit of a degree. Giving them the freedom to step out
of college when circumstances demand, and later pick up from where they
left off, will transform millions of lives.

But what would have been truly courageous of India is—as this column had
once argued—to altogether remove the requirement of a degree for
non-technical jobs and all aptitude tests. Millions of young Indians who
do not wish to pursue knowledge are trapped in meaningless education,
wasting the best years of their lives, purely to obtain a piece of
paper. If the young are gainfully employed and they receive love for the
actual work they do, instead of pursuing charlatan degrees, cultural
hawks may note, half of all activism will cease to exist.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
