# Inside the mind of an Indian fan of Donald Trump

*2020-02-23*

In the late 1990s when Bill Gates visited Mumbai, the road from the
airport to South Mumbai was shut to let Gates zip through the city.
People lined the road to get a glimpse of the world’s richest man.
Mumbai, which is still naïve in a rustic way, is not so much in awe
anymore of a mere richest man or even a pop icon. The rest of the
nation, too, has moved on. Indians are more likely to be excited by
air-conditioned trains with automatic doors than famous people.

So the Indian government’s extravagant welcome to US President Donald
Trump is anachronistic. Yet there is meaning to how Indian Prime
Minister Narendra Modi has chosen to celebrate the president. Trump is a
completely new sort of famous person. He was not made in the factory
that had a monopoly over the manufacture of an American icon. As a
result, his Indian admirers are not the same people who traditionally
invested emotion in an American president. They seem to love Trump
because they see Modi in him.

The average Indian fan of Trump likes him for the same reason he likes
Modi—he likes himself, has his own ideas of how to govern a nation,
projects these onto certain politicians, and then starts admiring them
because he believes they think like him.

Until recently, he had to hide his political and social views from his
own family and friends, but now his ideas have become mainstream.
Billionaires and actors openly share his views. He sees in Trump a man
who, like Modi, was condemned by arts professors but rehabilitated by
voters.

He sees a similarity between the Modi government’s new immigration
policy and Trump’s apparent efforts to stop the influx of foreign
Muslims. But he misses a crucial difference. Despite Trump’s
pronouncements, his official policy has enough sophistication not to
overtly discriminate on the basis of religion. The Indian government
appears not to have been quite as smart.

He imagines that there is a global fellowship of strongmen from various
nations who have uniform views, just as those posh global liberals have
about Muslims, transgenders and dams. And he is very confused when
conservatives in the West, and Trump himself, express pious views on
India’s “human rights abuses”. It does not occur to him that
conservatives have strong positions only in a space that matters to
them—home. Elsewhere, they are sweet because it costs nothing. As this
column once argued, “When the stakes are low we are all leftists.”

He is also an object of wonder for writers who cannot make out what
ordinary people like him, who are not very rich or successful, see in an
unethical billionaire. The fact is, for most people in the world, class
is more repulsive than wealth. Wealth is interesting, class is caste.

Like Trump, his Indian fan is on the side of strength. He believes that
people are genetically and racially ordained to do well, and that luck
plays a very small role. And he has read the synopsis of Chanakya’s
*Arthashastra* and thinks that being Chanakya is to be slyly practical.
And he believes Trump is just that.

There is another type of Indian Trump fan who is not necessarily a fan
of Modi. He is the papa of a feminist.

It is all so oppressive for this patriarch. One, he is called a
patriarch, derisively, but has no power in his own home anymore. He
can’t even say women’s tennis is boring. But then Trump says stuff,
deadly stuff, especially about women who have no respect for patriarchs.
Trump represents a revolt against all politically correct despots.

Also, Trump has a wife who is beautiful and much younger than him. This
reminds ageing men that there is always a second chance, or is it third?
Whatever it is, it is another chance at living the way men really want
to live.

And there is something about this Elizabeth Warren, a Democrat in the
race for the White House. She disturbs him. He is unable to understand
why he hates her, but he knows he has to present logical arguments
against her. The way he presents his case, it is as though he has
thought deeply, and then, as a result of his deep thoughts, developed a
dislike for Warren. But then we know that instinct comes first, and the
arguments follow.

Even as the patriarch thinks of moral reasons why he dislikes Warren
(such as: her idealism will destroy the global economy), his own
affection for Trump has a certain art-grade moral greyness.

Until Trump came along, political analysis had one puzzling nature. At
the heart of all analysis was the notion that voting is a highly moral
act. It did confuse him—how, when he had so many mean thoughts,
political analysts presumed that he would turn righteous when he went to
vote. For instance, in the US, it was unthinkable for a man who was
caught having an extramarital affair to run for president. Trump has
shown that the voter is not as unforgiving of human flaws as analysts
once claimed.

There are a few other types of Trump fans in India. For instance, people
who care very little about Trump but are pushed to love anything that
the new breed of self-righteous radicals hate.

Even among the elite, or the “broccoli-eaters”, there are secret
admirers of Trump who covertly despise their own emasculation. They
usually hide their love for Trump very well, but on occasion they reveal
a bit of it through a cautious statement that begins with a condemnation
of Trump and then “but you know” followed by a logical argument they
read somewhere for free.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
