# Why some things scare people more than other things

*2020-04-26*

The way India has responded to the covid pandemic, it is as though the
government cares deeply for us. India, it seems, does not want Indians
to die.

This affection is confusing because India allows poisonous particles to
float in the air, lets thousands die every year on its roads, and lets
trains derail. Actually, India does not even shut the doors of most
trains. India lets dangerous chemical godowns function where scores have
been burnt alive. It allows so much filth and stagnant water that
mosquitoes, snakes and pigs thrive in the heart of towns. People die
after a feast; children perish after a free meal in schools.

Why is it that a nation that has very low standards for life and living
has such high standards in its war against one disease? Yes, India is
imitating nations that have very high standards of life for its people.
Even so, it is doing a very good job of it.

India, like the rest of the globe, is in the grip of a very successful
fear. Like people and startups, some fears succeed wildly while other
fears, which are just as substantial, fail. What makes some fears
succeed?

You may argue that an almost hysterical fright was evoked by covid-19
because it was the correct, scientific and moral reaction of an evolved
world. Here are two of your most respectable arguments that justify the
unprecedented shutdown of the global economy: Covid-19 is less deadly
than other famous diseases like Sars, Mers, Ebola and Nipah, but the
disease is easier to transmit and infects millions more and in that way
is more deadly. And, swine flu, which is a recent version of the Spanish
Flu, spreads faster than covid-19 but its fatality rate is low. Hence,
an intense fear of covid is justified.

This is not a very convincing argument, though.

Imagine if someone in January had told you that an infectious disease
has broken out and that it would infect one billion people and kill over
half a million. What would you want your government to do? Will you say,
“Ah, the fatality rate is less than 0.1%”? Or will you say that half a
million deaths are unacceptable, let us shut down the economy for
several weeks?

The disease I am referring to is swine flu, which spread across the
world in 2009 and 2010 infecting one billion and killing half a million,
according to estimates. Yet, the world did not shut down in 2009 or
2010, even though the prognosis was grim then. What made the world react
differently to two different prospects of mass global deaths?

To understand successful fears, it is useful to understand failed fears.
This is because it is hard to see the mechanism of success, as triumph
is shrouded in an illusory web of respectability and learned opinions. A
failed fear, on the other hand, is naked. For instance, the fear that
mobile technology may cause cancer.

In the early 1980s, a set of powerful activists could have killed mobile
technology, but, fortunately for us, they were then preoccupied by a
snazzier technology—biotech. They would eventually manage to defame
genetically modified organisms (GMOs) for decades and build a highly
successful fear around it.

In his book, *Seeds Of Science*, Mark Lynas, a former anti-GMO activist
himself, reveals how the fear of biotech was manufactured. There is a
moment in the book when he says of a powerful anti-GMO activist, Jim
Thomas, “…(although) he did have concerns about mobile phones too, it is
undeniable that communications technologies are not nearly as
emotionally charged as food and farming”.

If activists back then could see the potential of mobile phones, this is
what may have happened: Their rejection of monopolistic tech might have
inspired them to highlight scientific mutterings over how radiation from
mobile phones may cause cancer. That is all they may have needed to
ensure that mobile phones, as we know them, never came to be.

What is behind a successful fear is the same as what is behind all kinds
of success—chance, which is our vague word for a complex set of numerous
anonymous events. But there are some broad knowable factors at work in
the success of fears, as in the case of GMOs or Aadhaar. For instance,
the support of influential people who have an ideological interest in
the transmission of a fear.

In my view, this is how the fear of covid-19 spread: China discovered
the disease and did something very Chinese. It shut down a large portion
of the nation because it also had control over switching on what it had
switched off. American tech billionaires came next. Many of these
billionaires have two qualities that are good conductors of fear—they
seem more afraid of death than others, and they appear to constantly
anticipate their own destruction in the rise of sentient machines or
diseases. Also, they have deep respect for China, which manufactures
their goods. Some of them, especially those who did not make physical
goods, called for the US to imitate China and lock itself down. They
transmitted their panic to a few influential journalists who were
wondering what their own opinions were on the matter when leaders such
as US President Donald Trump and British Prime Minister Boris Johnson
expressed contempt for the idea of a lockdown. This set in motion a
powerful Western humanitarian reaction in favour of a lockdown.

Meanwhile, as a triumphant fear still reigns over the world, Indians go
on living in a perilous country, and dying on the roads, in trains,
after feasts and in factories. But wearing masks.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
