# Why future artists should get stuck in science streams

*2020-07-19*

I propose a library sign: “Be quiet, like Indian parents whose children
scored less than 90% in their boards”.

If you have ears or eyes, you may have found it hard last week to escape
the jubilation of people whose children had scored high in Class 12. Or
this annual headline: “Girls Outshine Boys”. The outshining happens
every year in almost all examinations, including the civil services, but
rarely in objective-type quantitative reasoning tests.

The way parents react to academic success, they clearly think that it
guarantees a good material life, or at least that academic failure
foreshadows financial insecurity. But then how did the lives of India’s
thousands of toppers turn out? Did the last-benchers fare as poorly as
their teachers prophesied? We are not talking about happiness here, as
any measure of that complicated thing is a sophisticated fraud. Purely
on material terms, did the past toppers find the life and visas that
were prophesied? They were, of course, promised boring but secure and
lucrative jobs—did that happen? Will last week’s toppers thrive in a
world where their education and degrees and whole professions might be
obsolete?

Over the past few years, many Indian parents have resisted the
veneration of exam-taking, but they had to fulfil their quota to go
wrong. As a result, they have become besotted with a fable that is
growing more and more persuasive—that what a prospective engineering
graduate may really want to “do in life” is wildlife photography. Or
sing, or write, or make movies. And that if adolescents “pursue” their
artistic talents, instead of science or medicine, they will be happy,
even rich.

I myself have suggested such a scenario in an article about 12 years
ago, and that outside the engineering and medical streams, there was
“the beautiful world of the backbenchers”. I wish to make some revisions
to my earlier view.

An adolescent who is reasonably good at science and maths, but finds
them boring and wants to pursue a more exciting career in a “creative
field”, is not necessarily doing the right thing by abandoning formal
science education. Here I am not talking about youth who have a deep
interest in the arts and wish to learn, in a scholarly way, the history
and aspects of what other people have created. I am only referring to
those who might be creators themselves, who believe they have a gift in
non-scientific domains and that they will be wasting it away in the
science streams.

To a true artist, nothing is a waste, especially science, because
science is philosophy. In fact, I believe that most of philosophy is
merely a set of dim questions asked too early in the progress of
science. In any case, no artistic gift can be taught. There can be great
insights, but an artistic gift gets better as it marinates within all
your ongoing experiences. So, formal education in the arts is for lovers
of art and not the artist. In some young artists, formal education may
do some serious damage to his or her basic instincts.

German filmmaker Werner Herzog is known to have said, “Somebody who has
been a boxer in Africa would be better trained as a filmmaker than if he
had graduated from one of the ‘best’ film schools in the world. All that
counts is real life.” This is in line with his advice to aspiring
filmmakers to learn “a trade that has nothing to do with cinema”.

This is true for every creative profession. And this is exactly what
adolescent artists who are proficient in the sciences are offered on a
platter—to be artists who can comprehend and enjoy the philosophy of
science without the bleak prospects of being stranded in dull lucrative
jobs.

In any case, creative work is not a paradisiacal experience that it is
made out to be. Anything that becomes a job, a career, will become dull,
or at least have parts that are plain boring and tedious. The secret of
most artists is that they hate many aspects of their craft. They enjoy
something in the heart of it all, the ambiguous core, but most other
things are boring.

For the past several years, my mother has been talking to me about her
novel. She enjoys the ideas in her head as they form, but she has not
got down to writing anything substantial on paper. It is hard physical
labour. There are millions of writers in the world who have never
written a word—they have these beautiful ideas in their heads, but when
they have to bring them out into the physical world, something goes
wrong; those ideas are not so beautiful anymore and then there is the
accompanying sense of intense fatigue.

That is why the most foolish advice that I have heard seasoned writers
give the youth is “read, read, read”. I have heard this dramatic
iteration many times. That’s like asking young cricketers to watch
videos of Sachin Tendulkar. Writers must write, write and write, and run
miles or lift heavy weights. If you are not physically fit, your body
will fool you into overrating your mediocre third draft.

I find it amusing that the rigorous scientific stream prepares an
adolescent better for such a job than the delightful laxness of the
artistic streams.

So, if there are potential artists out there who have scored in their
high 90s, making their parents preen, and who have, through their own
exam-taking abilities, made it too emotionally expensive to quit the
looming science stream, I say it is not such a bad pressure to face. A
lot of science is pure art.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
