# Bollywood is ripe for a takeover by a pragmatic rebel

*2020-07-26*

The revolt that has hit the Hindi film industry has parallels in the
anti-corruption movement, even though in “Bollywood”, both the camps
observe intermittent fasting.

In the Anna Hazare movement, politicians who did not have the capacity
to win elections, also known as activists, revolted against professional
politicians. In the anti-nepotism movement, filmmakers and actors who
have found it hard to enter commercial cinema’s mainstream have revolted
against a small cartel that they claim controls the industry by
promoting cronies and sabotaging competition. Both the movements project
the lame masquerade of making the world a better place, but they derive
their force from something far more potent—self-interest and the fury of
the second rung that wishes to be the top rung.

Both movements seem to presume that the general public is naive,
short-changed, and stultified by prolonged exposure to low standards.
Here lies their doom.

The first wave of the anti-corruption movement failed without ending
corruption in India, or even transforming politics. This is because it
made the wrong presumption that India is morally superior to Indian
politics, while the fact was that politics is an accurate reflection of
the will and character of people. In essence, modern India is what it is
by popular sanction.

The commercial film industry, like the rest of capitalism, is a form of
democracy. A product is produced based on market surveys, instincts and
conjectures to please consumers; money is spent on influencing
consumers, but in the end, consumers are free to vote. Yes, in laying
claim to the lottery of success, the children and friends of the
powerful have a huge head start. But success itself is not guaranteed.
In fact, most star children whose debut breaks are genetically
transmitted to them fail. A film cartel can shrink the pool of people
who have the best shot at commercial success, but success itself is not
preordained. People have to vote.

While commercial cinema is a democracy, “art” is an autocracy of the
elite. The business of art seems in the sway of cartels far more than
the business of entertainment is.

There is a reason why commercial superstars endure. A lot of money has
gone into the making of commercial superstars and in training Indians to
enjoy a type of junk cinema. This cannot be neutralized by mere talent,
just like mainstream Indian politics cannot be transformed by the mere
morals of disenchanted rebels. “You can’t get rid of us,” Shah Rukh Khan
told me in an interview over 15 years ago for a story on why ageing
actors endure in Hindi cinema. “We are deeply rooted in your psyche.” He
is still around.

For the anti-nepotism movement in the film industry to succeed, it needs
what the anti-corruption movement needed to survive in a practical
form—someone like, say, Arvind Kejriwal.

Anywhere in the world, a crusader-turned-politician starts out as an
idealist, and when the great fuel of protest has taken him to a height
but is only a burden thereon, he tends to jettison it for more practical
fuels.

Any idea that overrates human nature will fail, but a revolutionary need
not entirely lose his ideals just because he needs to win over a vast
number of people. That essentially is what a typical
humanitarian-turned-politician is—never a sell-out but somehow still in
the game.

Hindi cinema has had its share of practical crusaders and small
revolutions long before India’s anti-corruption movement arrived on the
political scene. Ramgopal Varma, for instance, whose middlebrow cinema
took considerable risks in the battle for the mainstream. It is
fascinating that even though he accused “Bollywood” of being enslaved by
a formula, his films thrived on it. He only made three kinds of
films—about gangsters, about a vulnerable girl, and about ghosts.
Artistes are so often accused of being repetitive, but it is a good idea
for them to mine a familiar domain than to create shallow stories about
things they don’t care about. Eventually, Varma’s new films failed not
because of formula, but perhaps for the same reasons that usually doom
iconoclasts—deep faith in their own instincts, low respect for others’
opinions and the absence of a strong, critical spouse.

Varma did not create a new audience for his middlebrow films. He only
showed that there was an audience for them—if not in millions, at least
in the hundreds of thousands. Varma was replaced by Phantom Films, a
company created by Vikramaditya Motwane, Madhu Mantena, Vikas Bahl and
its best known face, Anurag Kashyap.

Kangana Ranaut, the mascot of the ongoing iteration of the anti-nepotism
movement, may be correct when she says Kashyap has moved closer to the
mainstream; but she is wrong to present this as an accusation. The
natural progression of a revolution is to become the new mainstream.
That entails rebels discovering that the people they once despised are
actually not so despicable.

In a recent interview, Kashyap argued that the lament against nepotism
is “10 years late”, and that there are vast opportunities today for the
unconnected. Streaming platforms themselves are an effective avatar of a
transformative activist. No other force in the field of entertainment
has levelled it in such a short period. That is the beauty of
capitalism—a revolutionary can be a corporation. Many industries have
had potent rebellions against powerful cartels, but many of them failed
because their anti-establishment movements did not mutate into a
mainstream power.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
