# What we learn by looking at poverty as a pandemic

*2020-06-07*

It is not exactly poetic to say that poverty is a pandemic. In fact, it
is almost a dull journalistic fact. Poverty, after all, shares some
important characteristics with a global disease. Especially extreme
poverty. You may argue that its victims do not transmit it beyond their
own family, but it is hard to dispute that poverty is transmitted. Not
only transmitted, it is transmitted across national boundaries. It has
asymptomatic carriers.

Before we get entrapped in finding the correct analogies to substantiate
a metaphor, let us settle on the most disturbing aspect of the poverty
pandemic. It is a feature revealed by the world’s response to the more
proper pandemic, covid-19. The governments, moral institutions and
public figures that have responded to covid, largely in a chaotic way,
are the same people, systems and platforms that are entrusted with the
task of fighting poverty. So what covid may have given us is an insight
into why the world has failed to cure extreme poverty, our most
persistent pandemic.

Extreme poverty is different from that more philosophical matter,
relative poverty. Most of us are poor compared to a billionaire, yet,
all things considered, we have a better quality of life than the
monarchs of the distant past. But then, most ordinary subjects of those
monarchs probably had a better quality of life than the millions of
Indians and Africans in absolute poverty today.

We can explain the modern origins of extreme poverty without taking a
moral high ground, without identifying villains, or claiming that we are
morally superior to politicians and industrialists. Let us consider the
most interesting aspects of our failed moral war against extreme
poverty—good intentions, imitation of foreign solutions, people who are
not poor making guesses about what poverty might be, a political grouse
masquerading as an intellectual argument, and scholarly but wrong
analyses. These same factors were at play in the world’s battle against
covid.

Which of the two phenomena that emerged from China last year is worse:
a) Covid, or b) The concept of a complete lockdown of a whole nation? We
know by now that the answer will differ according to the political bias
of the person considering the question. But despite that being so, there
is no ambiguity about a few things anymore.

When China enforced a lockdown of a vast section of its territory, it
appeared to know what it was doing. It had past experience in responding
to a highly infectious disease, and had control over the crucial forces
that are required to enforce the lockdown as well as hide bad news.
Also, it appeared to not only have command of the switch that shut a
vast swathe of its economy, but also of its restart button.

Several democracies, including India, imitated China to varying degrees,
but without such efficacy. Instead, they had a free press and a public
that is accustomed to vast freedoms. As a result, a feeling of chaos and
oppression engulfed these places, worsening a situation that was already
bad.

This is similar to how India has fought poverty. An idea comes from
elsewhere, transmitted by a powerful group of scholars, journalists and
businesses who have their own emotional and practical reasons to back an
idea. Indians who have influence over policy are then quickly colonized.

The way modern intellectuals speak of an idea they love is by making it
look as though there is only one way of doing the right thing. The
singularity of correctness makes sense in morality. That there is only
one way of doing something right gives clarity to the moral. But war
against disease and poverty requires greater ambiguity. As some nations
have demonstrated, there might be many right ways, and a society has to
choose the path that is best suited to its culture. In its response to
covid, I believe that the Indian government wished to do the right
thing, but what use is the right thing if it is done badly?

Some nations, like Japan and Sweden, went against the full force of
mainstream global intellectual opinion, which had a near theological
reverence for a complete lockdown. Those nations instead listened to
their own local experts, initially facing the ire and insults of
academics and the media that had contempt for anyone who appeared to
care too much for the economy. There was even a stigma of indecency
attached to equating the second-order effects of an economic collapse to
the second-order effects of a pandemic’s spread.

Poverty persists for similar reasons. There is something vicious about
the battle for ideas. Politicians, even when they wish to do the right
thing, are tripped by intellectual lobbies. As in the battle against
covid, in its battle against poverty, India has imitated foreign
solutions that do not work here, and treated its own cultural instincts
as inferior to Western ideas.

I do believe that most influential politicians across the political
spectrum really did care about saving lives. They cared for practical,
professional reasons, for humane reasons and even for supernatural
reasons because they did not want the curse of human deaths on them. But
as we know from our history of failed poverty alleviation, good
intentions are useless without a plan, wisdom and execution.

The war against covid and the longer, less urgent war against poverty
are defined and influenced by one other common factor: Nobody has a clue
what to do, the loudest voice wins, and the loudest voice is loud
because it has a moral timbre while the more practical and effective way
doesn’t.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
