# How ‘The Matrix’ was a massive spiritual experience

*2021-12-26*

I was 25, and watched the film alone at Sterling Cinema in South Mumbai.
It was that sort of a film; you remember details. As the fourth
instalment of The Matrix releases now, many years after the trilogy was
completed, let me remind you that in 1999, The Matrix was a global
spiritual experience. I have met people who have missed its entire
subtext and who think it was just a confusing greenish sci-fi film, but
they are very few.

Before I walked into Sterling, I had not read a word about the film. So,
a few minutes in, I was stunned. Or consumed by a great spiritual
smugness. You see, the film was about me.

At 17, I was Neo in Madras; there was even a Morpheus. What happened
was, one day, when a friend and I were alone in a big house something
significant occurred. He started looking weird. Then he told me nothing
is as it appears; there is something else out there. I got it
immediately.

We were not so cool as the characters in The Matrix only because we were
tropical, and did not require so many layers of black clothes. In fact,
my Morpheus and I arrived at the theory that it is hard for people in
cold nations to attain enlightenment because they are forever in the
frivolous self-regard of excess costumes.

In Sterling Cinema, I thought that only I and very few people knew that
the world around us is just a simulation, and that there was a way to
find the truth. I was a bit surprised that Americans knew this too, but
I was confident they were also very few. I thought most people will not
get the film. They were, after all, like the extras in Matrix, too deep
in the simulation to see the outer halos of reality. But then, in the
coming days, I realized that everyone got it. I was very annoyed and
disappointed. Everyone got it? That easy?

Even so, I discovered, there were two kinds of people. A majority who
knew the theory of spiritual awakening, and those who had a closer
experience with it because of a certain mental state, mental disorder,
sorrow or drugs. People who want to believe in an alternate reality are
people who do not enjoy the original reality.

The idea that the observable physical world is not real has
corroboration in religion and other stories. And even in some theories
postulated by scientists, which are often misconstrued as ‘scientific
theories’. But the first three Matrix films were a corroboration at
unprecedented scale and its impact was deep because it was not a
farcical film. Even though it was made by the persuasions of mainstream
entertainment, it was unafraid of complexity. It was a film that was
prepared to fail.

The true power of spirituality, or philosophy, which is often
spirituality for atheists, is in the vagueness of its meaning. As a
result, it allows people to misunderstand its creators and messages.
Misrepresentation is how people project their own character on to
something else, and start admiring that thing without realizing that
they are only loving themselves. The film gained from this, as people
attributed their own meanings to its many allusions.

The Matrix is about our quest for something better. The film could have
followed the formula laid out by all religion: Show truth as a paradise,
something infinitely better than what a prophet persuades people to
flee. But in The Matrix, the real world is impoverished, tough and grim.
All it has going for it is that it is real. That is the film’s
greatness. It showed truth need not be utopia.

The most convincing idea of the film is its argument that when people
have to choose between an unreal paradise and a very real hell, many
will pick the unreal paradise. But then there will be some who will
choose truth above everything untrue.

Not all ideas in The Matrix are spiritual, or even philosophical. It
hints at phenomena that happen in the real world known to us but do not
always see. In the film, ‘the matrix’ is a computer simulation created
by advanced machines that have taken over the world. It has inbuilt
flaws that allow the rise of human rebels and even rogue programmes. To
that end, the matrix is a lot like capitalism. Every time it creates an
affluent paradise, people grow disenchanted, they long for conflict, and
humanitarians from well-off families arise—beneficiaries of inequality
who wage a moral war against inequality. Thus it was not unnatural that
Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels hailed from affluent families. And that
after them, generations of academics and writers who called themselves
Marxists were usually from wealthy families.

There is a scene in the second edition of The Matrix, where our hero,
Neo, meets The Architect, the computer programme that has created the
matrix. Neo, who is leading the human revolution against the machines,
wants to know, “Why am I here?" The Architect gives a tangential answer,
“You are the eventuality of an anomaly…"

It is the same in real life. All our heroes who lead the war against
capitalism, too, are creations of the very system they wish to
dismantle. Their job is not to destroy capitalism because they cannot.
Their job is merely to manufacture the hope that capitalism can indeed
be destroyed. By promoting mediocre foes, capitalism ensures more
threatening enemies never rise.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
