# The confusion we suffer over the question of mortality

*2021-04-18*

A part of this, the part about not letting the dying die, is a universal
human condition. We are obsessed with saving lives. Especially the lives
of the very old. And what we mean when we say ‘saving lives’ is not
really saving lives, but prolonging a life until the inevitability of
impending death. That all people wish to live another day is the only
confident assumption most people make about others, as though there was
a giant survey commissioned by a respectable research agency with the
question, ‘Do you really want to live?’

It does appear that people do want to live. For instance, many do wear a
mask these days; at times, they lift it gingerly, tuck in a samosa, or
take a deep thoughtful drag of a cigarette, and then pull the mask down
again.

Our pandemic has demonstrated that even if people do everything they can
do to die, like attending weddings and festivals after a whole life of
having lovingly nurtured diabetes, society has no doubt they wish to
live. But there is something more significant that the pandemic has
reminded us of. The optics of delaying death are the same as saving
lives. The young and the old, the healthy and the unhealthy, the lovers
of life and the suicidal, all endure the same process of medical care.

In reality, saving lives and delaying death are different things. Saving
lives, say when a disease sweeps across the world, is the primary moral
obligation of medicine. Delaying the inevitable among the affluent old
in expensive private wards is how the industry makes money. Our medical
response to illness has saved many lives, but it has also created a
culture of delaying death even if the life that is prolonged is worse
than death.

Science has helped us become the first generation of humans that simply
does not let go of life. This has less to do with any special love of
life, or perhaps even of the dying, than our common fear of death.

In most people, being comatose is the biggest fear. They would likely
have conveyed to the spouse these famous dark words: “If I am ever a
vegetable, pull the plug." Yet they do not have the heart to pull the
plug on their own parents. The size of the hospital bill, which reflects
how long and how intensely a person’s death has been delayed, has become
a sign of love in people’s conscience and for public display. As a
result, people today are doomed to be flogged to their very limits by
the very people they love.

In a 2010 essay published in *The New Yorker* magazine, Atul Gawande, a
surgeon and author of Being Mortal, wrote, “For all but our most recent
history, dying was typically a brief process…These days, swift
catastrophic illness is the exception; for most people, death comes only
after long medical struggle with an incurable condition."

All my life, I have tried to find out how the elderly feel about the
realization that they have just about another five or ten years to live.
They are not fooled by optimism, I learnt, but they love to live, even
if it is with their sight dimming, hearing fading, mind wavering and
legs collapsing. A time comes when the predominant sign of life in a
person is a tremendous pain in parts of the body that they never knew
existed, and such a life would be unbearable without modern
pain-killers. Yet they extract enough from life to wish to continue. So
when the final days come, their children will extend a confused
rationale and keep them strapped in a bed as a living corpse.

It is usually never the old but the young who keep talking about dying.
We are, after all, a species that distinguishes itself from other
animals in possessing the merciful ability to kill ourselves and be
liberated from boredom, or gloom, which are usually the same thing. But
even those who contemplate doing it keep themselves alive, and they do
so in ways that are metaphorically similar to how the world keeps the
terminally ill going on life support.

Even terrorists in a suicide squad get punished through life. About 12
years ago, after a Pakistani suicide attacker survived his attack, India
undertook a long process to sentence him—to death. The country’s then
home minister P. Chidambaram said it was “a message to Pakistan", and
the message was that if you are a suicide attacker, we will put you to
death. India considers living so precious that it was the most valuable
thing it could take even from a person who had resolved to die.

There are many things that are natural to human beings that are
unnatural in the wider animal world. One that we rarely talk about is
the way we delay death. Our attempt begins at birth. A high proportion
of people are not innately strong enough to have survived life without
vaccinations and medicines. For long, we have been a species that has
stopped rewarding the fittest with the exclusive rights to procreation.

Today, a majority of adults are unhealthy. But they will live long—if
not vertically, then at least horizontally.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
