# James Bond and what stories think of their audiences

*2021-10-03*

In the end, James Bond will not die. That is the understanding between
you and the creators of Bond. What is the point then of all the
expensive dangers in his way? Where is the thrill if you know the
eventual outcome? The promise of a Bond film is not thrill, it is
familiarity. Like the sacred bond between NASA and aliens. A decent
alien should be carbon-based, depend on water, send radio signals and do
other things familiar to Americans as life, but with an extra limb so
that it is more quaint than immigrants. NASA’s alien, which is part
science, part fiction, and Bond and hundreds of other such characters in
storytelling are consecrated by familiarity. Some details change only to
help storytellers retell the same story.

The familiarity here is not only about your expectations of the story,
but also the story’s expectations from you. Stories know a lot about
you. They know you talk a lot about change and new things, but you
actually don’t want that. What you want is what you are familiar with,
but with an extra limb. We are suckers for home, and home is everything
that is familiar. Stories know this.

Not all mainstream stories are about familiarity. In the
medieval-fantasy series *Game of Thrones,* you can never be sure which
‘central’ character will be killed. That series knows the true meaning
of violence, whose force does not lie in gore, but in bereaving you. It
raises the stakes for you, and a story can then achieve thrill in an
inexpensive way. This, too, stories know.

Every story that is told is a sum of stories told before it. And an
analysis of you and every person before you. Here are some things
stories know about you, or think they know about you:

You want stories to be moral. If an animal knew us only through our
stories, it might think we are a very moral species. Even criminals do
not want criminals to win in stories. In the 90s, when the underworld
was still powerful in Mumbai, some dons fancied themselves as writers
and would discuss scripts with top filmmakers. I gathered that all those
stories were moral—good always triumphed, and the gangsters had
compelling reasons to do bad things, for which they always had a price
to pay at the end.

The heroes and villains today are not as farcically good or bad as they
were even a decade ago. There is a bit of darkness in heroes, and a
righteous mind in villains. But this ‘greyness’ is merely that extra
limb. Nothing much has changed. A reason for the endurance of this moral
direction is that stories have not invented an alternative. Even web
series that claim to defy conventional storytelling do not dare defy
this requirement of stories—that they be better than how you lead your
life. The arc of the web-universe might be long, across many seasons,
but it always bends towards justice.

In the Marvel farce called *Infinity War,* many superheroes die and a
population-control activist named Thanos triumphs by killing half the
life in the universe. But you might have accepted this ending only
because you knew one more instalment was coming, in which you knew
Thanos would be defeated. I had predicted in this very space months
before Endgame that the studio would lean on the nonsense of
time-travel. Time-travel is today a lazy piece of writing and the most
unremarkable strand of a genre of fantasy that is wrongly called
science-fiction. But it knows that you find it fun.

The triumph of good in all our commercial stories does say something
about your inherent need to be good, the default human condition that
may have given us an edge over other species, but it is also a result of
a practical matter—the moral story is yet another old invention that is
so perfect that its evolution can only be incremental (like an umbrella,
a physical book or the iPhone 12).

Stories also know that your life is probably so happy that you think
‘darkness’ is a billionaire dressed like a bat going about the
poorly-lit sets of a Hollywood person called Christopher Nolan. And that
if a story gets one thing right, like a city’s depiction, it can
convince you that everything else, too, is authentic.

Above all, stories know you are a probable megalomaniac. Full of
yourself, you search for your biography in all things. Even your privacy
anxiety is only a tribute you pay yourself because no one else does. But
stories are where you look first. And in the ones you like, you
‘identify’ with the characters.

Pulp fiction knows you better than art. Art does not try to reach out to
you, so it has no need to second-guess you. Art does what it needs to;
it is more pure than humble. So even though it wants your appreciation
at times, it has the courage not to care about what you are. But pulp
fiction is a democracy and you are the voter. It has to gather data on
you. This is mostly useless, but the genre’s best proponents have an
ingenious talent: They can guess what you want even if you yourself
don’t.

A story knows it is an idea-delivery device. Any complex thought can be
delivered to a wide audience if it’s hidden in an entertaining story.
Look at what Matrix did—it conveyed the idea that the material world is
an illusion; and that if most people were shown the truth, they would
still wish to go back to the lie; that there are no rewards to finding
the truth beyond knowing its bleak existence.

Indian stories, especially, know that you need to know what qualities a
young woman must possess for a young man to adore her. It’s usually her
looks, wit and a certain sweet delinquency. But you rarely ask what the
woman found in the fellow.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
