# How the government lost farm reforms to rich farmers

*2021-11-21*

Once Prime Minister Narendra Modi could deny Indians their own cash for
several days, and not only survive the stunt, politically, but thrive.
Now his government has had to take back a plan that may have enriched
the poor, a plan I want to present in half a sentence. But then, it is
hard to avoid the messiness of its details, a reason why our most famous
storyteller could not market his most humane attempt yet to liberate
Indian farmers.

On Friday, about 14 months after his party enacted three farm bills, he
told the nation they would be repealed. It was a triumph for rich north
Indian farmers and the rural middle-class movement they led. Many urban
humanitarians, too, rejoiced. And if you were clueless about India, like
a conscientious Barbadian singer who has a good heart but is too busy to
read policy, you may think the three farm laws of Modi’s government are
filled with evil designs to rob and torture poor Indian farmers (and
then somehow win elections after doing that).

In reality, those laws were reforms that intellectuals have talked about
for decades. They aimed to free farmers constrained to sell their
produce at state-designated marketplaces, usually done through
profiteering middlemen; thus also free them to sell their crops online
or through private contracts; and free the market from an old law that
marks some superstar crops as “essential" commodities that cannot be
hoarded in large qualities, paving the way for corporations to buy
directly from small farmers.

If the laws were so good, you may wonder, why should farmers object?
They were told a good story, and like most good stories, it was simple
and scary, and it was told by their rich.

Affluent farmers of Punjab and Haryana gain the most from an old
procurement policy under which the government guarantees a floor price
for major crops. These farmers are entrepreneurs but do not face all the
risks of entrepreneurship. They could have gained the most from the new
laws, too, but then why risk revolutionary change when the current
system suits them? They have no incentive to experiment with other crops
instead of dumping rice and wheat on the government. Why should they
risk change? So, they told a story, not entirely implausible, that
minimum support prices would end; that farmers will be at the mercy of
the market, that they will be left dependent on big companies that will
offer high prices at first but eventually squeeze them dry. And, what if
this is the start of a devious corporatization of farming? What if all
this leads the government to withdraw as a big buyer, and what if free
or cheap electricity and other subsidies vanish, and worse, what if
farmers are asked to start paying income tax?

Rich and middle-class farmers were afraid of change and they sabotaged
reform for the poor while claiming the moral high ground. Same old
story.

Also, most protesting farmers were led to believe that according to the
new laws, if they had disputes with corporations, they would not easily
be able to go to court. This is true, but the new laws offered an
alternative dispute-resolution mechanism manned by government servants
and private players. Foes of change framed this as a system where
bureaucrats would play judges. The way some people lamented this
dispute-resolution system, you would think Indians love their courts and
judges.

The farmers’ movement, like the anti-corruption movement earlier, was an
upper-class political movement that recruited the rest. Just as the
Congress party could not counter the anti-corruption movement, the
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) could not fight the farmers’ moralizing
story with its own story because the farm laws, however good as policy,
were a terrible yarn. It did not have a clear villain. Procurement
agents were not as appealing as villains compared to the imagery of
Indian farmers being enslaved by Reliance, Walmart, the Adani Group or
“a new East India Company". Also, the defence of the reforms was in the
details. Our doom as a species is in the fact that stories are a poor
medium for complexity, and stories control the world.

Not just that, the BJP told a very bad story in a very bad way. For
instance, it got some of the richest actors and cricketers to defend its
reforms. These celebrities earn by endorsing brands. So even their
admirers know they are paid message peddlers. Why would you use famous
liars to tell the truth? Also, the party was unable to draw farmers in
other states to demonstrate their support for reforms. There is a reason
for this. The fuel of an agitation is lament, not optimism. No agitation
in support of something can be as electrifying as an agitation that is
against something.

It is not as though those who protested the farm bills did not have good
reasons. All the reassuring elements of the new laws were hypothetical
and set in a distant abstract future. And, the Modi government’s record
on the execution of its esoteric ideas has been very poor. Actually,
forget revolutionary ideas, the BJP is unable to even fix roads and
street lights in places where it controls both the state and municipal
administrations. Also, the covid pandemic’s second wave hurt the
reputations of Modi and his party.

So, what now? Many of the reformist ideas proposed are already in
practice in several states, like the freedom of farmers to sell outside
designated marketplaces. Otherwise, things will continue as before. And
poor farmers will one day cease to be poor farmers, when they become
poor security guards and factory workers. Some of the refined foes of
farm reforms will then write heartbreaking poems about poor landless
migrants.
