# The unrelenting nuisance of sociable people

*2021-06-06*

The sociable declared Indians special and immune from whatever it was
that people in the West were going through. They attended weddings,
parties and dinners, and surely laughed hard. If you ever investigate
why a group of ten people laughed so much in a restaurant, what was the
exact joke, who made them laugh and why, you will never find out. This
is a world filled with laughter, but some of us struggle to find a
half-decent new sitcom.

When the second surge occurred, India did what it did best. It planned
for nothing, but looked baffled at the rational consequences of its
inactions. And everyone blamed politicians, which is the most
therapeutic thing that is available to Indians. Now the same people are
at it again. They have to go out and meet people in crowded places; that
is what they claim is life and joy, and even the economy.

I read on Twitter, “You spend your whole life gathering guests for your
funeral." Several people have said this without crediting whoever came
up with it, who I suspect was a loner, one who did not collect too many
guests. But, the calamitous second wave that sociable people triggered
by being sociable resulted in funerals without guests.

Modern life is an endless nuisance caused by sociable people. The
nuisance is not in the act of meeting other people, which may be an
essential activity, but in the excess. People tend to overdo what helps
them escape themselves. The same phenomenon occurs in socializing. There
is excess, and there is addiction. And, what people mostly think is
moderation is in reality excess. The gregarious not only spread diseases
more efficiently, they also crowd restaurants and aeroplanes, and
inflate the general price of fun for true moderates, the decent
misanthropes. The gregarious also control success.

One way or another, success is not a reward for being extraordinary.
Success is a reward for being a good friend, given by good friends.
People, especially the talented, gain immensely from finding their own
tribe. And relationships with people are not built on efficiency because
there is no such thing as quality time. There is only time; you need to
marinate in people; that’s how companionship works. But then, everything
about meeting others is unhealthy, involving large amounts of sugar and
disruptions of a sleep cycle. It need not be this way, but it is. As a
result, even without a pandemic, the sociable end up becoming the first
carriers of any new pathogen. Also, they create a social order based on
likability, friendship, drinking and the capacity to waste time with
other people.

Now that such a social order is in place, there are vast professional
and emotional advantages in leading unhealthy lives and some
disadvantages in leading a healthy lifestyle, like rising and sleeping
early, going out only to meet those who matter, and picking online chess
over an outing for ice-cream. Actually, forget physical health, even if
you have high standards for conversations, you are at a disadvantage in
this world.

So, what am I asking the world to do? Stop attending weddings, stop
crowding restaurants, stop meeting people, get interesting and quit
laughing hard ? I knew you would be melodramatic. I am talking about a
form of excess here.

The sociable are people who indulge in an excess of human companionship
and facile activities like drinking to achieve it, as opposed to, say,
trekking, which is a more difficult way to enjoy human company. The
gregarious, who are addicted to excess socializing, are neither a
minority nor as numerous as they seem in restaurants. By nature, they
are just more visible (and audible) than the rest.

One may argue that most of the world is sociable and those who are not
so, and who write good-natured columns rebuking the sociable, are a
fringe group. But this is not true. There are many who don’t want to
indulge in the excess but are forced to play along by a powerful system
of fun created by the gregarious.

Have you tried asking people to meet you over a walk instead of food and
drink? Many find it weird, or too intimate. But this was not how the
world was. You read any history of modern science in Britain, you will
invariably encounter two young scientists meeting up and walking through
the woods for hours discussing the nature of reality and so on.

But today, especially in India, there is no network effect to support
healthy and beautiful ways of meeting people. This is how the sociable
are a never-ending nuisance to the misanthropes. Also, they have defamed
the misanthrope as a people-hater. Leaving psychiatric cases aside, in
the practical world a common misanthrope is not someone who hates
people, and this is because most people are not interesting enough for
that. The misanthrope merely despises what a collection of humans
create—like, for instance, the dull social world, and the cult of
mediocre superhero films.

A misanthrope is not necessarily a hermit. Surely, he did not stay at
home throughout the pandemic. This is someone who would take some
calculated risks to fly to beautiful places. An aeroplane is not a risky
medium when it is not a social vehicle. It is safe if you don’t open
your mouth too often.

As sociable people now begin to step out, and make plans to meet other
sociable people, I do hope they achieve one of the most useful things
that sociable people ever achieve—herd immunity.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
