# The odd monopolies ruling our mental health discourse

*2021-10-24*

In matters of physical health, the influential are physically fit. In
matters of mental health, the influential are usually, by their own
analysis, in poor mental health.

There are big differences between physical and mental health, so there
is a limit to finding parallels between body and mind. Even so, the
over-articulation of physical health should warn people about the
over-articulation of mental health.

In all the creeds that promote physical health, the evangelists almost
always have fit bodies that most people do not possess and may not ever
be able to. Many aspects of yoga and calisthenics, for instance, are
unattainable without a particular arrangement of muscles and bones. The
entire inspiration industry is built on the megalomaniac’s rhetorical
question: ‘Why can’t you be like me?’ The ‘talk’ about mental health
contains the voices of genuine sufferers but it is monopolized by
megalomaniacs who have discovered a new way of talking about
themselves—what they are going through, their reasonless sorrows, their
problems, their fights.

Some good has come from this, just like calisthenic videos have made
people fitter in their failed pursuits of hand-stands. I know some
people suffering from mental illness who have started talking about what
they are going through and have derived this confidence from famous
people. It comforts them to talk; they are not expecting a cure. Even
so, the public articulation of mental-health has been taken over by
celebrities whose afflictions appear mild, and this has its dangers. The
famous cannot speak the whole truth.

In Asylum, a history of how India dealt with its mental health, author
Daman Singh writes that G.F.W. Ewens, once superintendent of an asylum
in Lahore, believed “in a case of acute mania… regular and ample feeding
was essential—if necessary, by force. For a patient who did not take
eggs and meat, he suggested plenty of milk, ghee, sago, tapioca, and
rice. If also induced to perform some form of manual labour, certain
patients became less violent and began to sleep better."

This might seem like a crude solution today, but it broadly represents
the conventional view that nutrition and exercise have a major effect on
mental health. And that is also the mainstream scientific opinion today.
But in all the ‘talk’ about mental health, we hear very little of this.
Sugar itself has become as sacred as mental health; you have to be
careful what you say, people are fragile. In a mollycoddled world,
nothing that gives you stress can be prescribed to you. If the prospect
of a 5km jog every other day and a life without flour and sugar upsets
you, the famous are not going to suggest that.

There is another danger of letting celebrities take control of a
conversation. A legitimate way for the famous to make money is by
talking about stuff. What if their words on health are funded by a
business? If I ran a US pharmaceutical company with a monopoly drug for
a psychiatric illness and wanted to expand my market to places like
India where few took medicines for “melancholia", I would persuade
Indian celebrities that they need to talk about what they are going
through—no products, no endorsements, just talk about your feelings.

If the US Central Intelligence Agency could fund the globalization of
Russian literature, why cannot a pharma company get behind “let’s talk
about mental health"? Unless, this has already happened.

In the physical world, this happens in obvious ways. For instance,
sportstars promote drinks filled with sugar as “rehydration", and shoe
companies sponsor ‘conversations’ about amateur running.

Also, the more that ambassadors of mental health are feted, the more
they are encouraged to offer healing tips. That brings to me the image
of a large feeble man who has diabetes imparting his views on physical
health. Eat like me, he says, work out like me, think like me, be me.
This can never happen. Actually, this can happen because anything can
happen these days, but he will never become a prophet of physical
health. Yet, this might be what’s happening in mental health. The most
influential ambassadors of mental health are in poor mental health. The
articulation of mental health today is not only the testimonial of the
ailing. It also has those who promise a path to something called
“wellness". And many of these people who have solutions for poor mental
health may not be sane at all. They are probably influential because
they have deluded themselves into believing they have found a path to
joy.

The ideal model of mental fitness would be a person who seeks happiness,
and finds it in occupation and preoccupation, who gets bored now and
then, but not so deeply that it becomes sorrow, whose sorrows are caused
only by remarkable events and not by the mere gloom of twilight or the
sight of a white car, who is not in an environment where the ideas of
mentally-ill intellectuals are passed off as pursuits of a better world.
To be precise, a banal person. Not only is such an unremarkable person
of no interest to anyone, he or she is not allowed to comment on poor
mental health because mental traumas are so sacred today that only
people who have experienced its agony are allowed to talk publicly about
it. In effect, it is like a world where diabetics have a monopoly over
all conversations about physical health. What can go wrong?

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
