# The future of the masses in a rapidly changing world

*2021-01-17*

A few days ago, when a mob of Americans invaded their legislative
building, everyone said it was “unthinkable” a few years ago. But, when
we say that an event that has occurred was “unthinkable” once, does it
only mean that we are not very good at thinking? Or that something truly
extraordinary has happened that has fundamentally altered human nature?

The attack on the US Capitol corroborated a notion that many people
have—that other people have become more stupid, more insane, and more
dangerous. Across the world, the type of people who used to have a clear
idea of a majority as a single bloc feel the quality of the masses has
deteriorated.

What really is going on? What is the future of the masses ? What is the
most logical outcome of a world where ordinary people who used to toe
the line of rulers have begun to behave in extraordinary ways?

What we have seen in the past five years is nothing compared to the
things that will occur. In the future, the masses will behave in even
more extraordinary ways. It will all be “unthinkable”, especially for
“thinkers”. I do not believe that people have transformed. Just that
today they are more empowered to be themselves. An omen of what is to
come lies in a seemingly unrelated fact—in some aspects of life, there
is no such thing as the ‘mainstream’ anymore.

The disappearance of a coherent mainstream in politics, entertainment
and culture should tell us that the masses already are not a single
collective organism that can be influenced by a different class. As
melodramatic as this may sound, for the first time since the invention
of ‘class’, the few have lost control over the most.

The film Wag the Dog begins with a question: “Why does a dog wag it’s
tail?” An answer then appears: “Because the dog is smarter than its
tail. If the tail were smarter, the tail would wag the dog.”

In the film, the American president’s spin doctor assigns a Hollywood
producer to create a fictional war to distract the population from a sex
scandal. The film is correct in presuming that a handful of people can
fool or influence most people, and that this has been the basis of all
social order and civilization. What the film did not know then was that
the whole theory of morality itself was wrong—the presumption that a sex
scandal was a president-killer. That the American president has to be a
very decent person was merely a journalistic opinion of the most
influential of journalists in America, and not a fact, as the subsequent
rise of Donald Trump would demonstrate.

The majority in any society thinks very differently from the elite. In
fact, the very definition of ‘the masses’ should have been a group of
people who cannot be analysed correctly by the elite. Even so, until
recent times, the monopoly that the upper classes had over the entire
spectrum of transmission of news ensured they could still influence the
majority. Now, all this has changed.

What exactly is mainstream? It is a large body of humans thinking or
loving or doing things in a certain way that benefits a small group of
people. So it is natural that the collapse of influence will also make
the mainstream vanish.

To fully understand the meaning of this disappearance, let us look at
areas where the vast mainstream of monoculture exists—diet, nationalism
and religion. The mainstream diet across the world, which is very old,
has endured on account of the human addiction to named and nameless
sugars, and because of food subsidies that make these cheap to
mass-produce. Nationalism, which was invented to lower the cost of war
by replacing expensive mercenaries with men who had a sense of identity,
has endured as a habit because a nation is primarily a habit. All major
religions are co-options of ancient factions by an influential elite
that have endured because religion too is a habit.

Such a mainstream, filled with diverse people who were conditioned to
think and act alike, existed in politics, culture and material
aspiration. But those mainstreams are now dissolving. Even nationalism
is taken over by the factions of religion or language. Religion itself
is becoming subordinate to caste and race. In the future, religion might
be a mere philosophy, and caste and race the actual religions.

There is an interesting question we should ask about the mob that
attacked the Capitol: Were they few or were they many?

Some argue that the mob represents mental illness more than the US
population; that they do not even represent Trump supporters. This could
be true, but it should not comfort us. Mobs are a peculiar kind of
modern faction present in every society today. They grow out of
mainstream politics but are too extreme to be controlled by the
majority. They have the motivation, grievance and insanity to storm the
citadels of our civilization. There have always been great rewards for
melodrama and the flouting of decorum. The left has been demonstrating
this for years through its hyper-moral activism that uses fake news to
create fear—as in the case of agitations involving Greenpeace and
against genetically modified crops.

In a world where the mainstream is fragmenting, what is the future of
vast nationalistic organizations like the Bharatiya Janata Party and
national leaders like Prime Minister Narendra Modi? In politics, you win
when you are the first choice of a majority. But there is another way of
winning—when a society is so splintered that there are thousands of
local heroes, but you are the second-best choice of most.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
