# The war on fun and what it has cost us

*2021-12-05*

India is at war with fun. Our list of sacred cows, which includes the
actual cow, is getting longer. It is perilous to post a video of your
filmy dance on Instagram if a temple is in its frame, or any religious
element for that matter. All religions have an equal right to be
offended. Stand-up comedians are running out of things to say. Humour is
a risk. Laughter is the reward, and the punishment for failure used to
be the silence of the audience, but now it is possible jail time. Online
streaming channels are scared of almost everything that matters to
entertainment. Filmmakers have surrendered to the “atmosphere". You
cannot wear the national flag, only string it to a pole. And if at all
beef finds mention on a hotel menu, it is usually hidden in asterisks as
though it is a password. If you want to experience state efficiency, get
offended by something related to either divinity or nudity. Even people
who are offended complain that their freedom of expression has been
suffocated. New India really is a type of air.

Deceived by the myth of cosmic justice, you may think there will be
severe consequences for India. All this suffocation, you want to say,
will result in some great crisis. But what crisis? Financial losses? An
exodus of the rich? I think stifling fun and freedom will not cost India
much. It will get away.

People talk a lot about freedom, but they choose many other things over
it. That is why they flock to Singapore, or at least until it shut its
doors to keep out covid. The city-state is among the most sought-after
places in the world to reside in, and it is alluring even to citizens of
liberal nations. There is no freedom of expression there, but there is
order, and material prospects, which appear to matter more to most
people, at least for a while.

The way some people lament “the current climate" in India, you would
think it was a paradise of free speech before the ascent of Hindu
nationalism. But Independent India was never truly a free place. It was
just that offence was disorganized, like everything else. So, if you
were an artist or editor, you could get away because of pure inertia, or
just luck. Now offence is better organized. A system is in place for
just about anyone to complain and law enforcers to take it seriously.
This works so well because very few Indians believe in absolute free
speech.

Once Mohandas Gandhi sent a note to the famous cartoonist Shankar. “Your
cartoons… do not speak accurately and cannot joke without offending, you
will not rise high in your profession… Above all you should never be
vulgar. Your ridicule should never bite." This was the prophet of
freedom speaking.

It was a wrong advice to give a cartoonist, but it encodes an
under-appreciated reason why Gandhi was so popular—he was a lot like the
typical Indian. Even today, most reasonable Indians believe that you can
say stuff, but not if it hurts others. This is probably also the view of
most of the world. Free speech, however, emerges from a very different
way of thinking, as expressed by the actor and writer Stephen Fry: “It’s
now very common to hear people say, ‘I’m rather offended by that.’… It
has no meaning; it has no purpose; it has no reason to be respected as a
phrase. ‘I am offended by that.’ Well, so \[bleep\] what?"

This attitude creates a kind of fun that is of very high quality. The
intent of irreverence is not irreverence, but not to waste energy trying
not to be irreverent. This freedom creates not only entertainment, but
also literature and science. It is a blissful state of objectivity, a
tremendous neural bridge that connects the creator and the receiver. But
the option to offend matters to very few people: artists, philosophers,
journalists and the kind of people who are none of these but claim to be
all—activists.

Even among artists, philosophers and journalists, very few want the
option to offend because they wish to be harmless, or they are just
plain frightened of trouble. So, even among creative folks and their
audience, there is no big demand for offensive fun. In this world there
is perhaps greater demand for cryptos than freedom of expression. That
is another reason why India will get away by stifling fun.

Artistic freedom is extremely important to people like me who earn a
living from it. So we tend to overstate its moral force. Maybe many of
us, self-obsessed as we are, even believe what is important to us is
important to others. And artists and journalists, who have a vested
interest in free expression, have a disproportionate influence on
generating lament. But most people are indifferent or even opposed to
complete artistic freedom.

To an extent I do like this suffocation, it’s because I find it
challenging. Look at a nation with greater artistic freedom, say the UK.
What are its writers doing with their freedom? Their comedians can say
anything they want about their Queen or anyone. Their humour has no
risks. It is low-stakes, facile and hence unfunny. On the other hand,
even a high-school level poem by an Indian comedian about “two Indias"
can go viral.

Freedom of expression is not the only form of fun there is. In fact,
most people are more entertained by material fun, like wining and dining
and amusement parks. In this, too, India is against fun. Restaurants and
bars thrive not because of India, but despite it. They are harassed by
many wings of the government, which in turn offers them nothing more
than chaos. But in the end, the forces of capitalism help the leisure
industry survive India. Still, what has been achieved is unremarkable
even by third-world standards. Indian cities are dreary places. India
pays a price for that. If you are going to be a sensitive bore, you need
to offer something else.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
