# Kung fu pandas and other such disciples in our midst

*2021-12-12*

This is a golden age for self improvement. People can become better
people in many ways. In fact, calling this pursuit ‘self-help’ is like
calling a doctor, ‘doctor’. It may be correct but too vague. It is
instead called ‘entrepreneurship’, ‘mindfulness’, ‘fine arts’,
‘philosophy’, ‘spirituality’, ‘creative writing’ and many other such
things. I am thrilled, because so many people will become better people
very soon, and then they will do another course to become even better.
From what I have seen around me, the habitual, perennial mentees are of
seven types.

The Kung Fu Pandas: In the animation film Kung Fu Panda, a bumbling
panda with low self-esteem loves kung fu and wants to become good at it.
He is dissatisfied with the masters available to him, and leads a life
of regret. But then a string of accidents leads him to a worthy kung fu
master far away from home—an ancient tortoise.

I know some Kung Fu Pandas. They are passionate fans of an art form, and
they wish to learn. They are in pursuit of a mentor, but disenchanted
with the gurus available to them, who are close home or of their own
cultural type. Their low self-worth makes them feel that what is
available to them or what reaches out to them must be worthless. They
invariably find their master in a person who is racially different. The
Indian panda, for instance, would find his master in a wise Caucasian
tortoise.

Kung Fu Pandas are driven by a curse. They are of middling talent in the
art they so love. Not so bad that they need not bother with it, but not
so good that they can be great. So they need the social networks of
useful people. Thus they are friendly and respectful, and as they are
not too gifted, they are unthreatening, all of which leads to their
initial success that they wrongly attribute to their racially-different
Master.

Devotees of the Mind: A few years ago, I went to meet an Israeli called
Lior Suchard who said he was “a mind-reader". He is among the people who
have said that humans “use only 1% of their brain". By that they mean
unlike most people, they use much more of their brain, which is how they
bend spoons and tell you the name of your first girlfriend. Many people
do not wish to consider this magic; they want to believe in the mystical
nature of the mind, the reason why Suchard makes a good living. A
workshop he held in Gurgaon to inform corporate managers how to use “the
full potential" of their minds was attended by dozens of executives
whose giant companies paid <span class="webrupee">₹</span>16,000 per
mind for it.

The mind has to be the most common subject of self-improvement. The
typical Devotee of the Mind is a person who thinks he is “scientific",
by which he means that he will believe anything agreeable that a person
with impressive scientific credentials says, including nonsense. As a
result, if you have a ‘neuro’ in your past or present job description,
you can say a lot of abstract things about the mind, meditation and
inner peace.

But the fact is that the mind is the least understood part of an animal.
What we know today about the mind is almost the same as what people knew
a thousand years ago, except for the general acceptance today that the
mind is not the heart.

The Sports Analogy Consumer: A parable is an absurd form of a story. In
a parable, one improbable event occurs—like say, a hare and a tortoise
agree to have a race. And using this improbable event, the parable
conveys an improbable moral. (Yet, parables sell more than my books.)
The modern parable improves on the ancient form. In the modern parable,
a true event is used by a mentor to tell you what you can do to succeed.
Sports events are a special favourite. For instance, a guy will do a
corporate workshop on ‘Roger Federer’s Lessons in Endurance’. Or, if a
dull mediocre football team wins a major tournament, there will be some
seminars on why team work is greater than individual genius.

There are hundreds of thousands of Analogy Consumers who are willing to
see moral and practical messages in sports that can somehow transform
their lives. Naturally, to meet the great demand for this, suppliers of
Sports Analogy have roped in some of the greatest athletes who talk
tangentially about how others can apply their sporting ways. For
instance, Steve Waugh and Saurav Ganguly would be hired now and then to
speak about ‘leadership’.

Among the other major subscribers of self-improvement are The Tradition
Miners, who adore any principle as long as it is very ancient. For
instance, every thing Chanakya said in the Arthashastra. Or some Innuit
observation. But generally, the moral has to be not only ancient but
also from scriptures of the forward caste or dominant race that has won
the culture wars.

And, there are The Autobiography Seekers. I do not mean they seek the
autobiographies of legends—that is a very different market. Instead, The
Autobiography Seekers are self-absorbed people who think they are
seeking self-improvement, but in reality they seek stories that remind
them of themselves. And, there are The Masochists, who are hardwired to
rate a difficult method highly and be suspicious of methods that are
easy, pain-free and pleasurable.

And, there are also The Secret Disciples, like columnists who appear to
lampoon people who wish to be better, but are in the throes of
self-improvement themselves. Maybe they think that if they are secretive
about something, it must be very important.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
