# Why is the mind so difficult for science to understand?

*2021-08-29*

Since the age of 16, I have waited for science to say paranormal things.
I want there to be magic. Magic that is not only physics, but magic that
is magic.

There are phenomena that point to exotic states of reality, like the
infinity of space, and gravity, which is a distortion in space. But
these are among the same half a dozen things in popular theoretical
physics that I have been hearing about over the past many years.

The years of hoping that the extraordinary exists has taught me two
things about science journalism. If the headline of an article is a
question, it means the writer does not know the answer. If the writer
knew, the answer would have made the headline. The other thing I know
about articles without having to read them is that anything about ‘mind’
or ‘consciousness’ is nonsense (unless the article is about this fact);
and any scientific article on the subject would always conclude that we
know nothing yet. The latest issue of the MIT Technology Review,
entirely devoted to “the Mind", did not change my mind. I knew that if
there was anything new and dramatic I needed to know in neuroscience,
this issue would contain it. I read the magazine with a mixture of
familiar hope and anticipation of disappointment. Hope for confirmation
of the exotic, and disappointment out of habit.

In the last few years, humans have understood a lot about the physical
part of the brain, its electrical circuits, where and how memories are
stored, and how psychedelic drugs work. We have even improved our
understanding of a banal aspect of consciousness—being awake. For
instance, scientists have discovered that many comatose patients might
be more conscious than previously thought. But our understanding of the
more philosophical aspects of consciousness, the idea of self-awareness,
is the same as thousands of years ago. Vague conjectures are all we
have. With no clear idea at all about the meaning of consciousness and
where self-awareness comes from, the brain is merely yet another organ;
more complex, but yet another organ.

When what is important to humans has no scientific explanation, then
something that resembles science takes over. Today, a guy with ‘neuro’
in his past or present job description can spout anything about the mind
and related ambiguities like meditation, and his words would be
influential. Others who want to speak about the mind can interview
neuro-somethings and write books on the subject, or tell us their
findings through that new medium of American over-articulation—podcasts.

The consumers of spurious news about the mind are the world’s
melancholic. A key quality of the melancholic is that they were always
so, always searching for solutions, always finding them, always
reverting to melancholic states after their inner peace turned out to be
transient. The history of the melancholic is also the history of the
wellness industry.

All along, science has valiantly tried to crack the mind. Governments
have spent billions of dollars to understand consciousness.

Over the past decade, one set of scientists funded by the US attempted
to map the entire human brain. “At the level of individual neurons," as
Emily Mullin writes in the “Mind Issue". The idea was to cure a host of
famous diseases and also answer that great question: “How does the brain
bring about consciousness?" Former US President Barack Obama called it
the “next great American project". A few years before this attempt,
neuroscientist Henry Markram tried to “make a computer simulation of a
living human brain… a fully digital three-dimensional model at the
resolution of the individual cell…" The EU gave him $1.3 billion to
build that brain model. The US would spend “nearly $6 billion" on the
mapping idea. But the two grand projects have contributed nothing
certain to our understanding. “…Instead of answering the question of
consciousness, developing these methods has, if anything, only opened up
more questions about the brain and shown just how complex it is."

American tech billionaires, too, are trying to understand the mind. This
is probably because they are scared of dying. A misfortune of their
wealth is that dying is more expensive for them than it is for others.
Maybe they think death is an obsolete natural technology that updates
species without any care for how special an individual is. And
billionaires feel that if they can understand consciousness, they may be
able to figure out how to sabotage their own decay. Some, like Elon
Musk, plan to download their brains to a computer. But the news from
their labs does not hint at any breakthroughs. Forget a new technology
of the mind, we still do not even know what it is.

Our consistent failure in understanding consciousness is remarkable.
Generally, we do not fare so poorly in science. I do not think it’s the
abstract nature of the mind that is the problem. Maybe the issue is that
the mind is not abstract. Maybe, like the physical nature of the brain,
there is nothing special about consciousness either, beyond its
complexity. It is just another illusion of a chemical machine, like
sight and touch. Primordial microbes became the neurons of the brain,
and they have no idea what they are doing or why they send signals that
make a human ask, “What’s the point of it all?" Maybe all of philosophy
is merely a question asked too early in the evolution of science.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
