# Why nobody seems very outraged by the Pegasus story

*2021-07-25*

At the heart of this story is a leaked list of nearly 50,000 individuals
across the world who, according to a consortium of activist and news
organizations, are of interest to the various clients of Pegasus,
including the Indian government. It is not clear how many of them have
actually been snooped upon. Forensic analysis has been done on only
about 67 phones. Seen this way, the story is more lame than it sounds at
first. And there is this mystery over why some significant foes of the
government, like Sonia Gandhi or Prashant Bhushan, do not feature in the
list revealed so far of “potential targets", while several journalists
do. But this is not the reason why you may not have been outraged. The
implication of the story is clear: India snoops on Indians who are
problematic to the government. Yet, it has not stirred strong disgust
and other emotions in you.

Democracy is based on the premise that a government has a vested
interest in being ethical because you will punish it otherwise.
Journalism is about the threat to a government that if it is unethical,
you will get to know, and you will then punish the government. But then,
if you have become indifferent to political morality, what is the whole
point of democracy and all its angst?

The idea that a government is elected or voted out for moral reasons was
always more a myth of storytelling than how society can be observed to
work in practice.

Most people are good, but good in a banal way—they do not want bad
things to happen to others, but they will be politically stirred only if
a bad thing directly affects them.

In 2002, when I was covering the Gujarat riots for a magazine, I thought
it was beyond debate even in India that if a political party has a role
in violence, and if that can be proven, the party will pay a price. As
part of my reportage, I interviewed Praveen Togadia, then among the most
influential Hindu nationalists. He said that for every English word
criticizing then Gujarat chief minister Narendra Modi in the English
media, “We will win 10,000 votes." I am still not sure if he said it in
glee, or out of professional envy, but there was no doubt he meant it as
a plain truth. He would be proved right, but at that time, it seemed
like an extraordinary analysis. The idea that any political party could
benefit from an accusation of criminal conduct seemed implausible.
Today, it is naive to possess such a frame of mind. And it is not
because India has become an immoral place.

Snooping has a certain journalistic significance because most
journalists have been trained to accept that ‘Watergate’ is the greatest
news story ever told, and it was about snooping. The story exploded at a
time when the influence of big news media in America was at its peak.
They could provoke the moral indignation of millions, and as a result
bring an American president to his knees. In India, the news media could
end the career of one of its most popular prime ministers by suggesting
that he took kickbacks in an arms deal.

But regular people are far more forgiving, far less sanctimonious, and
more self-absorbed than they themselves realize. This quality is able to
assert itself more freely today, as the power of the old media has
diminished and the fate of the new media is closely tied to how well it
is able to corroborate the emotions of people, rather than preach to
them.

People rate themselves as flawed, and they have a practical arrangement
with the world. They have high standards for politicians they do not
like, and a low bar for politicians they love or whom they find useful.

The politician they despise has to be honest, peaceful, efficient,
articulate, intelligent, straight and monogamous. A politician they love
could have a criminal past and be untrustworthy, but they will find ways
to accommodate him or her.

Even in the days before social media, the idea that the revelation of
immoral conduct will end a political career was probably an exaggeration
created by political theorists, as Donald Trump would later demonstrate.
Everything about him was the opposite of an ideal presidential
candidate, yet he won and may have won a second term if it were not for
his perceived handling of the pandemic.

People gave him a long rope for misconduct that did not affect them, and
he was then punished for something that mattered dearly to them—putting
their lives at risk. Modi, too, would possibly have paid a price for his
handling of the pandemic if elections had fallen in, say, April or May
this year. But the Pegasus fiasco will not bother him much.

Indians do no wish to be spied upon, but their government spying on
public figures and others is somehow not as stirring as other things
that involve no major morality issue—for instance, the rights of stray
dogs.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
