# The ruling party’s odd inability to promote a good idea

*2021-02-07*

One day in Chennai, some agitators sat on a footpath and claimed they
will fast until they died. Their rivals then arrived, sat across the
road, and started eating heaps of biryani claiming they will “eat until
they died”.

The ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has not displayed a fraction of
the swag of the biryani-suicide-squad in its response to the politically
orchestrated “farmer protests” against transformative agricultural
reform. I thought great armies of farmers will emerge from various
regions of India that are controlled by the party, rejoicing the end of
middlemen and the abolition of statutory restrictions on where and to
whom a farmer can sell his produce; I thought farmers would hold up
brinjals and tell BBC correspondents about their luminous future once
they are free to sell popular crops to anyone anywhere, even as the
government guaranteed them a profitable price, exempted them from income
tax, and plied them with free electricity and fresh water.

How difficult can it be for a ruling political party to convey to the
world that in an electoral democracy it is in its self-interest to
enrich half of India instead of impoverishing them while activists will
pay no price for deploying ideology to ruin the lives of poor farmers,
as they often do?

Instead the Indian government has got into a Twitter fight with singer
Rihanna, the activist Greta Thunberg, and other self-diagnosed
humanitarians of the West, and thus formally given the facile, dull and
innocuous global activism of the well-fed the stature of being a threat
to the nation. Also, the government or the BJP appears to have nudged
some of the country’s richest actors and cricketers to endorse farm
reforms.

The BJP has legitimate claims to interpret the agricultural reforms as
humane, on par with Manmohan Singh’s liberalization of 1991 that served
the Indian middle class so well. But I suspect the party does not
realize that propaganda and truth have very different ways of
transmission. When you want to tell the truth, never use famous liars.

Global activism, however farcical, usually has some substance, but the
global attention on what has come to be known as “farmer protests” is so
vacuous that the Indian government and the BJP could have used the
movement to demonstrate to the world how the poor are sabotaged by the
self-righteousness and moral posturing of a fashionable and ignorant
global elite, a class of people who need to recruit causes to fill the
emptiness in their lives with meaning.

It is not just the singer Rihanna and the world’s most famous activist,
Thunberg. Most people in India and the rest of the world who stand “in
solidarity with farmers” do not seem to have informed themselves about
the issue. The agricultural profile of any nation is a very boring
subject and studying it requires some effort. As a result, most people
who have a view on “what’s happening in India” do not realize that the
average Indian farmer is poor because the market for his goods is
inefficient. The new laws hope to change that.

Why is one of the largest and most successful political organizations in
the world, the BJP—or one of the largest governments in the world, for
that matter—unable to tell its own side of the story, one that is not
just a reasonable story but even humane?

In some respects, they are doomed by the very nature of storytelling. A
story is more farce than anthropology because of its two
requirements—plot movement and entertainment. The moral arc is the
easiest way to move a story, and the triumph of the underdog is a
combination of movement and entertainment. The triumph of morality and
of the underdog are not truths of the world, but two powerful plot
devices that the world has forgotten are plot devices. In the face of
such devices, the strong and the successful are no match for the
lamenters. The strong always tell bad stories.

But there are other ways in which a political party can communicate a
practical idea for reform. In the US, Barack Obama’s Democrats did it
well. The BJP is unable to do so because of its own failings. The track
record of the party in carrying out transformative reform is poor. In
2016, it had the revolutionary idea of cancelling large-denomination
currency notes, for example, but did not seem to know how to put new
cash in automated teller machines. And it wanted farmers to become
industrial workers, but did not succeed in expanding Indian industries.

Also, the party has the talent of preaching to the converted, but not to
the rest. Any priest can preach to converts, but it takes a prophet to
convert. An organization of priests will naturally make it hard for
prophets to rise. Like many large political organizations, it has not
nurtured people who are very good at conveying truths.

Also, this government has not been kind to people who are unrestrained
truth-tellers. A defining quality of this era is the perception of vocal
and creative Indians that they have lost their freedom of speech. They
feel suffocated by this government. Why then would they back it even
when the government deserves to be supported?

One of the reasons why strongmen have risen to power around the world is
that intellectuals have become so despicable that even when they make
sense, people doubt sense itself. This works the other way round, too.
To a section of people in India and elsewhere, the BJP is such a
cultural villain that they wish to believe the very opposite of what the
party says is good for the nation.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
