# How to choose a moral stand on the farmer agitation

*2021-01-31*

A moral position is an opinion that is somewhat more moral than the
person who claims it. It is usually formed after a cursory understanding
of agreeable facts or borrowed from agreeable people. A moral stand is
thus usually very easy to take. It costs nothing. Yet, the ongoing
farmers’ agitation has not supplied a clear moral stance to the
country’s urban mainstream. The past few weeks, I have often heard
people in need of an opinion ask people who have opinions, “What do you
think of the farmers’ protest?” The seekers then listen, but in the end,
they are still not sure.

I am not talking about consumers of ideology, people who form the long
tails of politics, either ‘left’ or ‘right’, and are conditioned to
delude themselves into taking a prefabricated moral stand seconds after
any news breaks. I am referring to most regular people.

At the heart of the matter, there are three new laws that intend to
transform how farmers do business and how the government does business
with farmers. And there is a section of farmers who hate and fear these.
What can be so perplexing about this?

The reason for the moral confusion is that the laws make a lot of sense.
The sense is on paper, but then laws are always on paper. The trouble is
that the branding of farmers as impoverished victims is so strong in
India that the instinct of the conscientious urban class is to take
their side.

What must you do then? Let this column help you form your moral stand.
The most important factor in its formation is not the nature of the
issue, the farce of pros and cons, or other ritual arguments. What
matters is your nature. Who are you?

Have you done well in the past five years? Or have you done poorly? Are
you more privileged than your parents, or have the other Indians caught
up with you after your early head start? Do you secretly or overtly feel
you are genetically superior and that you belong to a
genetically-superior race or caste? Or do you feel more racially modest?
Do you feel very healthy, lucky and rich, and confident that your future
too will be this way? Or do you feel shaky and vulnerable ? Do you feel
it is very cheap to be upper middle class in India? Or do you feel it
has become very expensive to be part of the elite in India? Do you feel
your religion and mother tongue are your home, or do you feel more at
home in Manhattan, London or Paris?

In essence, in a political field, at any given situation there are only
two kinds of people. Those who feel smug, and those who feel nervous
about their own circumstances.

If you are smug, it will be easier for you to take the side of the
government and its attempt to reform agriculture. And your argument
should run like this:

The new laws liberate farmers from the monopoly of Agricultural Produce
Market Committee mandis, the only places in several Indian states where
a farmer who grows some of the most popular crops can legally sell his
produce. But the new laws free the farmer to sell his harvest to anyone
he wishes anywhere, even online. The biggest losers are middlemen who
connect farmers with mandis for a commission, and the state governments
that earn thousands of crore on licence fees for running these statutory
wholesale markets. No wonder then that big agricultural entrepreneurs,
many of them politicians, are behind the agitation. As it happens so
often in India, street rebels are merely cheap recruits of the rich.

Also, the new laws do not abolish the guarantee of minimum support
prices (MSPs) for crops that were once deemed essential. The fact that
some popular crops have been removed from the list of essential
commodities is a practical necessity. ‘Essential commodities’ is an idea
from olden days, a poorer time when Indians had to be protected from
spikes in the price of foodgrains. Hence the hoarding of crops that were
deemed essential was banned. Today, India does not have to be so
paranoid. If a corporation is now allowed to buy huge quantities of
crops directly from thousands of farmers, it also needs legal freedom to
store what it has procured. ‘Hoarding’ is merely a mean word for
‘storing’.

If you are not smug, if you instead are one who feels vulnerable and
hence hate the strong, like the government, any authority and the
cultural winners of your time and place, and your own fragility has
created compassion for others, then you will naturally be drawn to the
farmers’ cause. Even though the laws are sound, you do have some
excellent arguments against them:

While it is true that the government has not abolished MSPs, the fact
that corporations can now buy huge quantities directly from farmers
means that they could form a cartel to push down prices in the open
market, increasingly making government procurement through mandis look
fiscally extravagant. This is the beginning of the end for the idea of
guaranteed MSPs, which has helped millions of Indians join the
middle-class. Also, the new laws play down the right of farmers to go to
court if they feel their contracts with private procurers have been
violated. Instead, the laws are bent on persuading them to accept a less
reassuring mechanism. Their liberty of appealing to the courts has been
sacrificed for the speed of conflict resolution.

These are the two sets of arguments for two emotional sets of people.

But what is the truth, you may want to ask, as only one stand can be
morally justifiable, surely? There is no such thing. There are always
two moral stands—one for the smug, and the other for the nervous.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
