# Mohammad Shami, and our misguided obsession with internet trolls

*2021-10-31*

I do not say no Hindu would ever hold such a dim view of a Muslim
cricketer. There are so many humans around, and so many with access to
the internet, that everything that can be said can be found online. That
is why it is absurd to accord any importance to the abuse of a few,
whose size cannot be ascertained and identities cannot be established,
not even whether they are human.

On the other hand, there is circumstantial evidence that India’s Hindu
mainstream, or even a substantial fringe group, does not endorse the
insult of Shami. The evidence is in the behaviour of famous cricketers.

Many Indians were annoyed a few days ago when the Indian cricket team
knelt in support of the Black Lives Matter movement, because our
cricketers are yet to take on any social injustice in India. But then,
that is precisely why they knelt. It was easy. You are woke when it is
safe, low-stakes and you have nothing to lose, and when you need to fill
a quota of human goodness as cheaply as possible. The fact that such
luminaries came out in support of Shami says something notable. If
Indian cricketers find the courage to take a stand, it means it is not
controversial to do so.

Even Sachin Tendulkar, who tends to keep his peace, came out in support
of Shami. Recently, Tendulkar had kept quiet when his former colleague
Wasim Jaffer resigned as a state coach in protest against the
allegations of some officials that he promoted Muslims. But the same
superstar was brave enough to “stand behind Shami". He could bet he
would not get into trouble because almost nobody in India thinks Shami
can go soft on Pakistan.

An annoying habit that “some people" have on social media is whining
about “some people" when they want to whine about one specific person.
This need to exaggerate the size of those you loathe is also behind most
overreactions to foolish statements made by a tiny number of people, or
bots.

Every day, self-absorbed folks get agitated by the views of a minuscule
minority, and announce the death of India. They do not want to believe
that in a vast society, zero can never be zero. Dozens, even hundreds or
thousands, should be considered zero. How many trolls make a society?
How many people constitute a bloc? Actually, how many people make a
minority? How many horrible tweets make for a national crisis?

These may appear to be abstract immeasurable quantities, but they are
not. They are quantifiable approximations. The weight of substantial
opinions, including minority opinions, can usually be felt. And the
lightness of insane comments by very few, too, can be felt—as in the
case of the Shami episode, which even had Tendulkar saying what needed
to be said.

But then, just as megalomaniacs like to exaggerate the numbers of “some
people" who say nasty things about them, people with strong ideological
views or other psychological disorders tend to accord disproportionate
respect to fringe statements.

There is a practice among naive writers and journalists. They land in a
new city, take a taxi and then get infatuated with the observations made
by their taxi-driver. Taxi-driver journalism is one of the most
meaningless forms of writing. If he has said something everyone is
saying, then what is the point? If he has said something remarkable,
then it could be just his view. Of late, people have found a way to do
worse than taxi-driver-journalism. They make up quotations of the taxi
driver. And that too is transmitted on the internet, which helps career
lamenters lament the decay of a society.

I do not say that we have to be dismissive of fringe opinion. Its
subscribers may be close to zero, but they are not air. Also, sometimes
a fringe opinion may signify a view that many people harbour but will
never say aloud. And that means a fringe opinion may portend a future
mainstream opinion. Let us not forget, even in the 80s, Hindu
nationalism itself was a secret yearning among many intellectuals,
bureaucrats and teachers who knew they would be penalized if they
revealed themselves. In any case, only wounded thoughts are infectious,
and wounded thoughts usually emerge from a sentimental minority. All
transmission of ideas are conducted by charged minorities. And, a very
small group of people with strong opinions can cause damage.

Also, overreacting to the fringe has benefits. Statistically,
emotionally and literarily, most of the world is moderate. A problem
with the moderate condition is that it is not very impressive, so
moderates find it hard to transmit their views. So, the occasional
overreaction by self-absorbed activists to some ridiculous statements
can convey the full force of the reasonable majority and hence serve to
reassure everyone.

Even so, the ease with which fringe ideas garner attention is absurd.
And it creates a bleak and inaccurate portrait of a society. On most
days, we need to give majority opinion a chance to win.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
