# Getting offended may have just got harder for Indians

*2021-02-28*

A few years ago, a man wanted to make a film about a little girl lost in
a forest and a tiger keen to eat her. He sent the script to the Animal
Welfare Board, probably to get clearance to cast a tiger, even though he
planned to shoot the animal in Thailand. He told me that a member of the
board refused to clear the script because she was offended by the
tiger’s portrayal “as a villain”.

India is a haven for anyone offended by anything. I mention the tiger
episode because every other thing that hurts “the sentiments of Indians”
might be familiar to you. Your freedom of expression has always been
subordinate to someone’s right to be offended. Maybe this is the case
everywhere. How different is a cultural cop from, say, a humanities PhD
who keeps saying, “It’s problematic”? But, in recent times, being
offended has become a national sport of India. The courts will admit
“the grievance”, famous people will be summoned, politicians will
comment on the matter, and the offended will hold public demonstrations
and wave at cameras.

All Indian governments appear to believe that a story can be told
without offending anyone.

So when the government utters the word “guidelines”, storytellers feel a
sense of suffocation. It’s almost Pavlovian. But, the Guidelines for
Intermediaries and Digital Media Ethics Code issued by the government on
Thursday were surprisingly commonsensical, even somewhat wise. They are
mostly good for streaming platforms like Netflix, filmmakers,
storytellers, even comedians, and you too, if you like to watch
“content”, and also for journalistic websites that really go by facts.
The guidelines make life difficult for Twitter, Facebook and WhatsApp,
and for the long tail of politics that masquerades as journalism.

The views of the government in the entertainment domain reveals a nation
that has accepted the changing times. Instead of banning content through
ambiguous claims of morality, it asks streaming platforms to enforce
classification by age, a normal practice in nations that are freer than
India. In fact, not only has the government refrained from infantilizing
Indian adults, it also treats Indians aged between 16 and 18 with
respect. They can watch nudity as long as the context is not sexual. For
example, Mr Bean changing in the locker room, or an aesthetic dance
performed by two anthropomorphic swans. Through age-gating, storytellers
have been granted the freedom to tell any story on any subject they want
and in any manner, so long as it is not pornographic, the definition of
which is not subjective to any reasonable person.

But all this does not mean Indians now cannot claim to be offended. They
can still enjoy their thin-skin and be offended by anything. But they
may not so easily run to the police or courts to complain. The new
guidelines call for the formal creation of a three-tier grievance system
to absorb the anger of the offended. This looks like censorship at first
glance, but it is not. Rather, it might just favour storytellers and
streaming platforms by delaying or even circumventing the terror of
criminal charges. The angry Indian can still go to court, but the
creation of a grievance system puts moral pressure on him to first go
through innocuous channels before enlisting the intimidation of the
state.

In essence, the government of India accepts that Indian adults are
mature enough to watch sex, violence and doping, and early Indian teens
will not be corrupted by just the sight of the naked human body. This is
significant. Sorry for sounding like Rihanna, but ‘why isn’t anyone
talking about it’? In cultural significance, I would put it on par with
the Vatican admitting in 1992 that Galileo was right—the world does go
around the Sun.

Life changes more drastically for social media platforms and activists.
The government asserts its right to know the origin of any bit of
information posted on a platform, and the names, addresses and
nationalities of those who transmit it.

The Bohemian freedom that social media has for long claimed for itself
was always thin in substance. As this column has maintained, there is a
distinction between liberty and freedom. Liberty is our most important
oxymoron—it is permissible freedom, or a set of freedoms that people are
given in exchange for protection by the state. It is a price we have
paid to flee the forest. In the battle between freedom and liberty,
liberty won a long time ago. And India is now saying to social media
that the idea of a global village is all very sweet, but you are still
subordinate to the writ of the Indian government.

This stand was inevitable after a sanctimonious mistake committed by
Twitter. It started censoring and blocking a particular kind of elected
politicians around the world; it started making moral judgements.

India too has made an error—by clubbing its wise guidelines for fiction
and fun with its stricter rules for facts and social laments.

In its uncharacteristic broad-mindedness on entertainment, India has
rightly viewed artistic freedom as fodder for a gigantic industry that
can fetch it billions of rupees in taxes and other forms of revenue.

In the last two years, I have seen two of my own stories alone infuse
over <span class="webrupee">₹</span>60 crore into India’s economy,
generating hundreds of jobs and surely significant sums of money in
direct and indirect taxes. The biggest industry of the future is fated
to be entertainment. No other drug that anyone has made will match it.
And to harvest entertainment, a republic that has for long been against
fun must know which way the wind blows.
