# What toll will Covid take on the BJP?

*2021-06-20*

All this was unprecedented, and it made the BJP’s rivals hope that the
pandemic may ruin it, just like the anti-corruption movement created
conditions for the destruction of the Congress. But will it, really? If
not this, what exactly can defeat the ruling party in the near future?

The BJP has stirred unflattering emotions in Indians before, and the
party has not only survived them, but even thrived on them. Now, in the
middle-class reaction to the BJP government’s handling of the pandemic,
there is one quality that should worry the party—brand stickiness.

When Indians say, “All politicians are all the same," it is not only a
resigned rebuke, but often good political analysis. There are no true
differentiators between political parties, especially when they are seen
as groups of people and not as organizations claiming esoteric things.

Almost all parties can be accused of corruption, communalism, violence
and harbouring criminals. Yet, they are separated by what accusations
stick on and damage them, and what never do. Charges of corruption and
inefficiency tend to stick to the Congress, even though all parties can
be accused of those. Charges of “communalism" and authoritarian
disrespect for freedom of expression tend to stick to the BJP, even
though it is laughable to assume other Indian parties are not guilty of
those. Charges of anti-business practices and pandering to the poor
stick to communist parties, even though there is no single region in
India where a small entrepreneur or major corporation would claim things
are easy for them or efficient. And, of course, the charge of “anarchy"
sticks to the Aam Aadmi Party, and the way some of the business elite
make this accusation, you would think they are used to Scandinavian
standards of governance.

Political parties are also differentiated by what never sticks to them,
what causes no electoral damage regardless of the validity of the
charges. Broadly, communalism does not stick to the Congress, even
though its individuals have faced serious charges of violent communal
politics. Corruption does not stick to the BJP or AAP. Also, accusations
of impeding economic growth rarely seem to affect any party in Tamil
Nadu or Kerala.

The success of the BJP, so far, is a consequence of the fact its poor
reputation in some aspects of human virtues has only helped it
politically, while the poor reputations of other political parties and
the brand stickiness of those reputations have dragged them to electoral
defeats. India might be a corrupt nation, in many ways, but no political
party has ever won because it is corrupt. The BJP, however, can win an
election on its reputation of favouring Hindus.

Under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, even when the BJP government had
clearly erred, or its policies backfired on account of poor execution,
it emerged mostly unscathed. It cancelled large-denomination currency
notes overnight and ended up denying millions of Indians access to their
own cash for many days. Yet, its popularity was high enough to survive
that.

So, what has the pandemic changed?

The BJP’s handling of the crisis seems to have created a new category of
negative branding, and today this branding is entirely associated with
the ruling party. The branding is of a specific form of incompetence in
dealing with a calamity. It suggests that in the face of a serious
national emergency, the party will not be able to manage the situation
efficiently. All Indian parties can be accused of this, no doubt, but it
is likely to stick to the BJP in a way that could extract a particularly
heavy price.

It is useful to remember that at the peak of the second wave, people
were not enraged by any of the other parties that controlled whole
states. In fact, some of them, as in Kerala, were admired for their
handling of covid. This is partly because the Prime Minister had
projected himself very clearly at the start of the pandemic as India’s
man in charge, and, earlier this year, when it appeared that we had
survived the crisis, he declared victory. Thus, when the second wave
came, he could not escape it.

So this has potential to injure the BJP’s prospects in the immediate
future, but will it?

I feel the party will survive the pandemic, just as it survived the
chaos after ‘demonetization’, but for very different reasons. When it
cancelled high-value currency, its popularity was very high. Also, when
cashless chaos took hold of India, there was a strong perception among
the poor that the upper classes had lost more because the rich,
obviously, had more money.

The BJP’s popularity probably stands diminished today, but the party,
government and its leadership will survive their handling of covid
because such calamities do not happen frequently. Also, except for a few
regional parties, there is no political force that can absorb the
current disenchantment with the BJP. And that is a complete waste of a
new brand stickiness.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
