# Rich Indians these days are waiting to flee India again

*2021-03-14*

Now and then, everybody has to flee home. Flee from parents, children,
the spouse and the city. And, if you are Indian, flee from India.
Upper-class Indians used to look forward to their periodic escapes from
the difficult nation. They were not all terribly rich, just upper
middle-class and beyond. They used to quit India once or twice a year by
means of a straightforward vacation, work assignment or compassionate
visit to an ailing relative abroad. Some would participate in amateur
sports competitions held overseas, like triathlons. Even do-gooders fled
to attend conferences in beautiful places. But the pandemic has stranded
them all, and made them endure India for too long without respite. Even
Indians with long-stay Schengen and American visas could not leave
because of travel restrictions. Or because it was simply unwise. After
all, India has somehow emerged as one of the safest places in the world.

Now, as the end of our great pandemic nears, or seems to, Indians who
must exit India periodically to survive life are getting ready, keying
in places on Google and ogling at images, as they await that moment when
some of the world’s richest nations become safe to visit. As of today,
the countries that are interesting to Indians and welcoming them are
Russia, Uzbekistan, Ukraine and Turkey. These are good options, but the
proper West is more alluring.

Tourists tend to describe a destination through its geographical
features and prospects for activities. Such a description will not fully
capture the essence of what Indians love about leaving India. If it is
just about snow and skiing, India has among the finest slopes in the
world; if it is about hills, mountains, rivers, great lakes, beaches,
forests, ancient tribal settlements or grand ruins, we have them all.
But people do not travel for a geographic feature. People travel to
flee.

What Indians enjoy about the West, consciously or subconsciously, is the
whole spectacle of the West—all that order and urban beauty. Cars go in
lanes, and my favourite part is how they don’t quit the lane even when
they turn a corner, and even when no one is watching. Honestly, I can
watch this for hours. I do not know if order is a form of intelligence
or retardation, but it is captivating to see a whole civilization
maintain it. People across thousands of miles, across a whole continent,
driving in their lanes—that is the real spectacle.

Moreover, median lines are not the only markings on those roads; there
are so many other things, in different colours signifying different
things, and everyone who drives there seems to know what it all means.
And there are walkways everywhere, and they look fancy too, as though
pedestrians matter.

Out there in the West, it is hard to convince people that they are
happy, especially in Europe, where they have for long claimed things are
bleak. But all I see there is joy in plain sight, street joy. People
spilling out of olden-day pubs, on to cobbled ways, and drinking,
eating, talking, singing and laughing. Kissing, too. And the government
doesn’t consider fun an enemy of the state. In the midst of laughing
yourself, you don’t see beggars carrying underfed infants. There is no
trauma as far as the eye can see. Nothing is ominous. Not even other
people’s religions.

Their newspapers, which are very mild affairs and do not stab you in the
morning with details of brutalities, speak of gloom. But when you step
outdoor, you don’t see any of it. The roads instead are filled with
happy people who look expensively dressed, even if it is not winter. And
everything is easy to do, whether it is getting on to a bus or just
walking around for miles. And you don’t have to get molested or endure
great suffering just to watch cricket like it is meant to be, in an
actual stadium. And, of course, the air is so clear that it smells of
trees, and on some days, you may also feel the full force of the sun.

There are spots in Gurgaon where if you train your camera at a
particular angle, it will look like the First World. The optimum angle
is somewhat upwards—that is, just about six feet above ground level, the
altitude at which you don’t see Indians in the frame. Something about
how Indians go about—the clothes worn, the gait—conveys the very
antithesis of an affluent economy.

In the West, the uniform of the cops, too, looks so good you immediately
accept they must be important people. Actually, all uniforms look
important. Even waiters look so important, Indians tend to behave
themselves. I think it exhausts Indians to spend so much time respecting
people who are poorer than them. That is probably why they go looking
for some Indian restaurant—to find Indian waiters they can torment. I
witnessed this phenomenon in Amsterdam. Indian tourists would be very
courteous with the service staff in most eateries, and then they would
be found at Saravana Bhavan, which employs only subcontinental staff,
yelling at the waiters.

After their first few days or weeks enjoying the spectacle of the West,
Indian upper-class travellers somehow grow melancholic. All these
straight lines and rules, all this order and equality, it gets to them.
And they are happy to return home—which looks orderly from the sky, at
first, before all those things that looked like straight lines are
slowly revealed to be crooked. And the air is filled with horns and
dust. And the returning Indians then rush off to their expensive
islands, where they pay a premium to keep real India out, an India that
occasionally seeps in, though, as a food delivery guy.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
