# A strange peer pressure has gripped India’s corporate executives

*2021-04-04*

Gurugram is packed with successful corporate men and women in their 40s
who dream of liberation through their own startups, and dependents who
hope to quietly sabotage those radical notions. The town is also full of
those who have liberated themselves. Once, on Monday mornings, they used
to go to an office; now, they are in small cafes talking about their
ideas.

Across Indian cities, a new peer pressure has come to exert itself on
middle-aged managers. If they are not working on their own startups,
they feel they are rotting away in the lap of a secure dull job. If they
are running their own startups, most of them have even more convincing
reasons to feel a sense of failure; just that it feels more like a
foreboding than restlessness.

They have developed some physical symptoms that once afflicted young
writers alone in the throes of their next big novel, or film. In the
trance of their ideas, they pace their rooms, walk down streets in
meditative awe, write concept notes, and fall under the motivational
influence of their professions’ gurus. They, of course, do a few things
differently from young hungry artists. They listen for hours to podcasts
from the United States on how to create a successful business. And they
must surely have heard, at least once, that famous convocation lecture
of Steve Jobs in which he said, “Your time is limited, so don’t waste it
living someone else’s life."

Since childhood, at every stage of their lives, they were told how to
live, and they followed. They were given a clear idea of a final
frontier, an objective that, if achieved, would ‘settle’ them forever.
But what they have discovered of life is that after a famous
objective-type entrance exam, there is one more objective-type entrance
exam; then another frontier, and then one more.

Life is an onion made up of final frontiers. And now the final frontier
is their very own venture. All their lives, they were driven by the fear
of their peers doing better than them. This fear made them conform to
every tenet of society. They did everything their elders told them they
should do, and they stayed away from what they were told to steer clear
of. But that fear just never ends; no matter what, the chase goes on. I
am reminded of a poem by the Tamil politician Kanimozhi:

‘Following my father’s advice,

I joined the school, combed my hair,

Avoided some friends, clothed myself well,

Cleaned my teeth, prayed, married

And am now waiting for my turn.’

After a lifetime of training to conform, be dependable, consider
‘disruption’ a bad word, never be rebels, and even punish rebels, they
now have to strike out on their own on the strength of an idea. How
cruel.

Those who are consumed by ideas, after the trance of the initial months,
begin to fear that their ideas are not remarkable enough, or perhaps
merely plagiarisms. There are many who do not have ideas. They only know
they need a startup, like writers who only know they have to write the
next big thing, though they don’t know what exactly they must write.
Where do ideas come from, they wonder. What must they do to ‘get’ an
idea. Is yet another way of delivering food to people an ‘idea’ ?

Among those afflicted with the fever of entrepreneurship are those who
have become venture capitalists. They will invest in chosen fevers, and
hope one becomes a hit. So many of the afflicted now approach them to
casually deliver a concept, that they have developed a suspicion of
anyone who says he has a great idea. Their faces remind me of publishers
who try to flee a person who wants to pitch a book.

Until recently, the corporate class did not have a foreboding of
failure. They were optimistic, arrogant and the least melancholic. But
now, in the age of ideas, many of them have begun to feel the
frustration of defeat. It could be the daily humiliation of having to
answer to bosses, and among the liberated, it is the prolonged absence
of a breakthrough. A persistent sense of failure was and is the majority
condition of artists and intellectuals who have an outsized influence on
the world; it’s probably why they portray the world in gloomy ways and
veer towards organized compassion. But what are the consequences of
capitalists, too, feeling like underdogs? They will turn more
compassionate, I guess, towards failure and sorrow, and join artists in
portraying the winners of our times as the arch-villains. Much modern
righteousness in the world, after all, emerges from millionaires
despising billionaires. As a result, the golden age of lament will enter
its platinum era.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
