# The young should quit activism and go make money

*2021-02-21*

You may say this is the wrong time to say it. This month, the Indian
government used disproportionate force against a 22-year-old
climate-change activist by interpreting her call for protest as a war
against the Republic, and put her in jail. Other young activists, too,
face serious consequences for their rebellion against India’s farm
reforms. But then, the wrong time to say something is also the best time
to test the tenor of a difficult argument. And the argument is this:
India’s young, who are of sound mind, and this is an important
classification, should quit full-time activism, refuse to work in
non-profit organizations, sack themselves as humanitarians, and develop
a suspicion for the hyper-morality that emanates from the West. They
should instead make money, or do well in the material world in other
ways, or at least start a doomed business.

I do not say for a moment that the young should not be interested in the
welfare of other people, or that they should quietly tolerate despots.
In fact, the only moral basis on which all my columns in this space
stand is: ‘We have only one job: if we are lucky, we must take care of
the unlucky; everything else is merely an argument about the best way.’
It is just that I feel the best way that the young, especially those of
privilege, can serve their nation better is by encashing their luck in
the for-profit material world, rather than choosing the easy option of
festive grandstanding and do-gooding, which is often harmful, at best
useless or an inefficient way to make the world a better place.

There are good arguments against such a view. Material success is tough,
a mere lottery, and often rigged. Why should the young be trapped in the
unhappiness of ambition; why should they waste their lives in dull
corporate slavery? And, no amount of taxes deposited with the government
or invisible jobs you create by expanding the economy can match the
excitement and meaning of direct intervention in a social cause. Even
so, my argument against early activism rests on these thoughts.

There is a crisis that some activists whisper about but cannot state in
public. Humanitarianism has become a magnet for the unstable who wish to
see unhappiness in everything. It is not a place where the happy and the
sane can thrive. This is a dangerous atmosphere for the suicidal or
merely the gloomy, like young people often are, as there is a perpetual
over-articulation of all that is bad in the world.

Last year, Barack Obama exhorted the youth to create change by asking
them to “make good trouble”, borrowing the phrase from a legendary
American civil rights activist. “Good trouble” is not as naive as
Obama’s imagination of “moderate Taliban”. The young can make “good
trouble”. What is “toxic”, to deploy a useful modern term, is full-time
idealism. The “joy of giving” is a pleasure that radiates from an
emotional feudal system in which some people feel a sense of importance
over the miserable. And that joy of facile validation can be an
unmatched intoxicant.

As in the case of any drug, it has its risks. And activists do get into
trouble with the state for their dependence on it.

When this happens, what is the moral responsibility of people who exhort
the young to become “good trouble”? In the US, the human rights
establishment can go to great lengths in taking care of its own. But its
travesty in India cannot. The young who hope to be “good trouble” can be
ruined by the state, and their handlers, who use them to achieve
political and ideological ends, cannot always save them. India is merely
an electoral democracy; it is not really a democracy in a Western sense,
nor headed that way.

Much of what is going on in India in the name of humanitarianism is a
part of the global industry of Western idealism with its identical
values. It is a new form of evangelism. That is why a Greta Thunberg or
Rihanna, or conscientious comedians like Trevor Noah, appear not to
think they have an obligation to read the dense prose of a nation’s
agrarian economy, at least on Wikipedia, before commenting on what a
nation ought to do about its own farmers. As this column has maintained,
India’s agricultural reform is a bold humanitarian effort, but to
Western social evangelism, an agitating farmer on a tractor has to be
the victim. In that way, once again, the global posh, in the euphoria of
do-gooding, are actually sabotaging India’s poor. This is exactly how
exotic socialism impoverished India, offering us tragic proof that good
intentions can kill millions, and that the liberation of greed can lift
one-fourth of a gigantic nation out of poverty in a single generation.

The Indian government’s claim that foreign agents are trying to sabotage
its farm reforms does sound silly, but there is substance in the
paranoia. The young do not always realize who is funding their agitation
and why. After all, America’s Central Intelligence Agency has been
revealed to have not only funded uprisings around the world, but also
sponsored Gloria Steinem’s feminism, and the globalization of Russian
literature.

To be honest, if I were India’s prime minister and worried about China’s
rise, I would summon my secret service chief and wonder how to promote
humanitarian agitations among China’s well-fed youth, and how to smuggle
into that country the drug of ‘joy of giving’. That would help China’s
rich, who are in search of meaning, inadvertently sabotage the rapid
rise of its poor. I know this sounds somewhat funny. But then again,
that is always an omen of truth.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
