# Cryptos of the mind that New India no longer accepts

*2021-11-28*

India is a village. Bitcoin is a hippie city. So, I wonder why India
took so long to express its contempt for cryptocurrencies. Whatever be
the cause of delay, very soon it will pass a diktat in its grand
panchayat that cryptos will be banned from entering the village unless
it wears more modest clothes.

Cryptos represent the sort of absolute freedom that emerges now and then
from the West. Specifically from a Western system that converts thought
experiments into human rights. Cryptos are encrypted digital currencies
that users can exchange among themselves with no need for a government,
a king, a central bank or commercial banks, or even courts and law
enforcement. Why must the Indian government diminish itself by allowing
a competing currency? The only anarchy India permits are protests and
driving.

Cryptos have sophisticated technological foundations, like blockchain,
which creates an eternal record of a given process that is extremely
difficult to tamper. India wants to adopt such technologies, and some
people tell me that it may even accept some cryptos as legitimate
investments, but can’t permit an alternate usable currency, that too one
which lends anonymity to users. India does not see all absolute freedoms
as human rights.

Like cryptos, there are many freedoms that emerge from Western politics,
thought experiments, melancholia, and often common sense. I like to call
these freedoms cryptomorals. They are not only freedoms, but freedoms
that challenge the state, or aim for some utopia that takes the logic of
democracy to absurd ends. In any case, they are all inventions that
became religions. Here are some of the most popular cryptomorals:
cryptocurrencies, of course; electoral democracy; direct democracy;
privacy; freedom of expression; feminism, free trade; globalization;
secularism; climate activism, human-rights activism; borderless
internet; net neutrality; the right to be forgotten.

Once, the West’s ability to transmit ideas was so strong and influential
Indians were so in awe of the West that India adopted some of these
abstractions as unquestionable ideals. But now, as the nature of
influence in India has changed and the village takes back control from
cultural orphans, modern India has relegated cryptomorals to the status
of mere ideas, some of them even bad ones.

At the time of freedom, India had no choice but to accept the wisdom of
democracy, which remains the most influential cryptomoral to come from
the West. Even today, outside China, an overwhelming majority of people
consider democracy the only moral form of government. Not the most
moral, but the only moral form.

India does not seriously challenge the goodness of democracy. But our
nation is not a proper democracy. We are a good electoral democracy, if
you do not believe the lament about faulty voting machines. But India
has rejected many other subsidiary cryptomorals of democracy. For
instance, in India freedom of expression is conditional. Your right to
be hurt by just about anything is greater than someone’s right to tell a
joke. India is a paradise for the offended. Typically, our lower courts
deny you freedom and higher courts express grand ideals in poor English.

Whatever freedom of speech that exists in India emerged not from any
Nehruvian magnanimity; rather, it emerges from the practicality of
India’s rustic electoral democracy where politicians trash-talk their
rivals and the news media reports their campaigns.

India does not take seriously the cryptomoral of direct democracy, which
requires referendums on major legislative moves. The main argument of
direct democracy is that parliaments are obsolete intermediaries, an
invention of a time when there was no way people in Madras could be
heard in a building in Delhi where laws are made. Today, anyone anywhere
can be heard. Blockchain technology can be used to make voting so secure
that no one can allege fraud. But India, like many nations, feels that
just because something is easy, it does not mean it is better.

The US evangelical mechanism once succeeded in making free trade and
globalization sacred ideas in India. Any politician or intellectual who
questioned these risked being portrayed as a socialist simpleton. But
modern India challenges all these concepts now in its search for its
best interests. The cryptomoral of secularism, too, was sacred until
Hindu nationalism showed it up as a useless word for atheism. In India,
secularism does not mean a godless state; it means all gods have equal
rights to torment you.

The idea of privacy is a relatively recent invention. It is not hard to
see the connection between privacy and dignity; but the self-importance
and paranoia that accompanies all talk of it today is a part of
contemporary urban megalomania. Privacy is a cryptomoral that India’s
government wants others to respect even as it spies on its citizens with
no consequences for those who enable this.

The internet came to India as an unstoppable borderless force that “was
designed to survive a world war". But India now regulates the internet
and controls its gateways. Net neutrality was a major cryptomoral just a
few years ago. According to it, a service provider should be barred by
law from giving faster or cheaper user access to software applications
willing to pay more. But today this neutrality is violated routinely and
few seem to care.

In some parts of the world, many of these freedoms grew so popular that
it was difficult for governments to deny them to people. This happened
with the internet across the world. Even so, many beautiful things begin
as freedoms and end up heavily regulated. In the new world, freedom is
never taken, it is granted.
