# How we’re beneficiaries of a suspension of human rights

*2021-08-22*

That is a message in a recent book, *Spy Stories: Inside the Secret
World of the R.A.W. and the I.S.I* by Adrian Levy and Cathy Scott-Clark,
who portray India’s Research & Analysis Wing as a cunning, ruthless, and
an underrated organization that is not only good at stealing informing,
but also in manufacturing tragedies to harm Pakistan. This comes through
in another new release, *The Lover Boy of Bahawalpur* by Rahul Pandita.
The books also demonstrate that the RAW is not shy anymore to portray
itself as a brutal shadowy force with a persuasive moral excuse.

The idea that the intelligence agency of a democracy is run by humane
patriots who make a valiant compromise with their own conscience to kill
and maim, and fund merciless terrorists for the greater good, is one of
the most successful myths our times.

Stories about these subterranean agencies would often feature
melancholic patriarchs who appear pained by their own practical games
that have destroyed many lives. But what I gather, and what I suspect,
is that a secret agency is usually a magnet for people addicted to the
thrill of intrigue, and also sociopaths and sadists, whose psychological
framework helps them thrive here. But they perform an extraordinary
collateral service—they do protect millions of lives from other mad men
who, too, kill for moral reasons.

The fact is, all of us are beneficiaries of the suspension of human
rights in many dark spaces in this world, where horrible things are done
to mine information.

Days after 11 September 2001, Levy and Scott-Clark write, Pervez
Musharraf, who was the president of Pakistan then, wrote down his
thoughts in a classified document. We think classified documents must
contain complex stuff we cannot think up, but most of them are simple,
like this: ‘“The US will go to war over al Qaeda at some point, and the
Taliban will become casualties for shielding them… Then, Pakistan will
have to choose. And if Pakistan chooses Taliban, while this decision
will be popular, it will also be disastrous. Let us consider: 1. Taliban
are mostly beyond ISI influence. 2. …The task is capturing their
attention and maintaining influence over the US. But also reaching out
to India."

This is interesting for several reasons. Pakistan’s president had a view
at odds with popular journalistic opinion even today—that the ISI
controls the Afghan Taliban. Also, Musharraf wanted to reach out to
India. But the RAW, the authors point out throughout their book, had
become adept in portraying Pakistan as a rogue aggressor eroding the
patience of a mature India.

After 9/11, the US treated Pakistan with very little respect; its
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) wanted directly access to the ISI’s
counter-terrorism wing, whose chief Azmat Hyat said, “I now had two
bosses…The I.S.I. chief, General Ehsan ul-Haq, and the C.I.A.’s
counterterrorism chief, Jose Rodriguez."

In 2003, something strange occurred, even by ISI standards. The CIA
instructed its counter-terrorism centre to raid a house in Rawalpindi
but refused to give any further details. It was a house in an upscale
area, fit for a general. As Pakistani officers broke down the door, they
were blindly following an American instruction with no idea what lay at
the end of their search. It was possible that an irate Pakistani general
could be standing akimbo there. But what they found was a sleeping
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, who was widely known then as the “mastermind" of
the 9/11 attacks. It took some effort to wake him up. “When they did, he
scrutinized their faces, and immediately offered them cash for his
freedom."

Soon after his capture, he was taken to secret CIA prisons in
Afghanistan and Poland. There he was brutalized in various ways. He was
also subjected to waterboarding, a form of torture in which a person is
immersed in water so long that he feels he is drowning; in some
instances, the subject takes water into his lungs. In Poland, Mohammed
was waterboarded 183 times. “Mohammed had been filled with so much water
that there was a danger that the electrolytes in his blood had become
dangerously diluted," Dexter Filkins wrote in the New Yorker, “The
officer requested that C.I.A. interrogators use salted water during the
waterboarding sessions."

Nusrat Naeem, an ISI officer who helped create the Hurriyat, an
organization that has fought for the independence of Kashmir, told Levy
and Scott-Clark, “Human rights are a construct used in times of peace to
choke U.S. competitors."

The confluence of several games of several intelligence agencies in
Pakistan reduced it to anarchy where even its president was not safe.
After one of many attempts on his life, he said, with sorrow, though it
might sound hilarious to Indians, “Some leaders get to visit the scenes
of tragedy and pass on condolences. Instead, it was me who continually
received commiserations."

Meanwhile, RAW carried out several operations to make Pakistan look
dangerous and untrustworthy in the eyes of the world. The authors hint
that there might be some substance to theories that Indian agents had a
connection to the 13 December 2001 attack on Indian Parliament. All for
the greater good of law-abiding Indians.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
