# This is a better way to ask the government to stay off cinema

*2021-07-04*

Some adults actually put heads together to draft this proposal, and it
is not worth the sweet tea they may have had during their meetings.
Their plan is to amend an existing law so that if anyone objects to a
film that has been cleared for public viewing, its certification issued
by the censor board would be put to a review, maybe even cancelled,
making the film unworthy for public consumption overnight. If you want
any justice in this country, you have to suffer long years in court, but
if you are offended by a film, you get express service—you don’t have to
go to court, just say you’re offended and the government will step in.

Why is the Indian government doing stuff like this? With so many real
problems that need to be solved in this nation, even within the
entertainment industry, why devote resources to what films contain? Why
create suffocating rules? Why ruin the industry with all this
uncertainty over the fate of every film? But this is exactly how you
must not argue with this government.

It is apparent that the government wants to control everything. In
response, the way our artists protest against an impending public
policy, however, you would think they are talking to Nani Palkhivala.
They are not up against a constitutional expert. While fine points of
principle may have some effect in courts, they need a different set of
arguments to persuade the government.

Imagine you are talking to a shrewd Indian merchant about why you
deserve a fair deal—what will you say?

You will build a non-ethical argument in your favour. You will not use
words like ‘institution’ or ‘principles’. But before that, you would
want to understand, clearly, what your interlocutor wants.

Why is the government investing so much effort in controlling cinema and
other forms of entertainment? Just a few months ago, it had expressed a
wish to regulate streaming channels. Now this.

The government has justified its cinema proposal by saying that the
Constitution “imposes reasonable restrictions upon the freedom of speech
and expression in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of
India…public order, decency or morality…" This official reason may be
just a secondary motivation, but it is sufficient to obtain public
support. Indians in general do not rate artistic freedom very highly as
they do not fully realize how they are beneficiaries of this liberty.
They would prefer that uncomfortable things are not said about their
religion and caste, for example, and so would like all religions and
castes to be considered sacred. Also, an unknowably large number of
Indians seem to assign a high value to sex by making everything about
it, including its portrayals, very difficult for everyone.

The existence of a minor moral reason is very advantageous for the
state’s larger hidden motive.

What are the potential consequences of this proposal becoming law?
Filmmakers who are critical of the government could be harassed and its
supporters favoured. Eventually, critical voices would be too risky for
big investments, inspiring everyone to keep shut.

Over the past few years, most popular filmmakers and actors have either
stayed away from politics or aligned themselves with the powers. But a
few, like Anurag Kashyap and the actor Siddharth have been very critical
of the government and the Bharatiya Janata Party. If the proposal
becomes law, they may find it hard to attract work. Modern India has not
eliminated free speech; it has eliminated the space for high rewards
from free speech.

If the proposal goes through, the entire mainstream film industry would
suffer collateral damage. A smart government that seeks control should
realize that too much of it with no pressure valves could prove
counterproductive. Filmmakers tweeting their dissent is among the most
benign forms of it for any government. It satisfies an urge and a market
for it without shaking the foundations of official control.

Successful people, like filmmakers and actors, have much to lose. So
their dissent is indeed brave, but they rarely ever cross a line. There
is a limit to how much they are willing to lose. By virtue of being
successful in the material world, they are beneficiaries of a stable
order, of systems, and they operate within its bounds. But they also do
the government a favour with their fame. They unknowingly overshadow and
eclipse more potent forms of dissent. Just as in the material world the
lucky few on top block the progress of geniuses at the bottom, so too in
activism, the top rung suppresses the rise of dangerous activists. If
successful people are muzzled, expressions of dissent could move from
people who have much to lose to those who have nothing to lose.

The proposal could also wreck the film industry’s economics. What will
happen if it becomes law is this: Unsure of what is safe for release,
every film will be self-censored; many things that make a film
delightful may go, all risky topics will vanish. As things stand, most
films fail. It is very difficult to get people to go to theatres. They
stay home and wait for a film to ‘drop’ free. Everyone today is like
that character in an R.K. Narayan story who wonders why people climb a
mountain to see a waterfall when the benevolent river takes the trouble
of tumbling down.

Any further strangulation could kill commercial cinema. India should not
take its film industry for granted. Many nations do not have their own
cinema, at least as a modern mainstream cultural force. Hollywood
imperialism has killed them, just as Hindi cinema had once killed
Pakistan’s film industry.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
