# Delusions are infectious, and collective delusions shape history

*2021-10-17*

They were two middle-aged men, two boys in their teens, two women in
their twenties, one in her thirties, and three middle-aged women. The
family matriarch, who was about 80, was probably too old to climb a
stool. She was found in another room, strangled. Those who were found
hanging, except one man, were blind-folded, their mouths gagged, ears
covered and hands bound. They probably helped each other tie themselves,
or they were sealed in this manner by the man whose own fasteners were
odd. The deaths are the subject of Leena Yadav and Anubhav Chopra’s
documentary on Netflix, House of Secrets. It is a calm and terrifying
recounting of an event that most Indians had only heard of through the
hysteria of television news.

The deaths of the prospering middle-class family have long been solved
as a case of mass suicide. Yet, they can also be interpreted as an
accident, or mass murder. The clues that helped solve the case were in
eleven diaries the family maintained over eleven years. Written chiefly
by one man, Lalit Bhatia, but aided by others in the house, these had
instructions on how to live, conduct themselves and perform some
rituals.

The diaries began in 2007, soon after the death of Lalit’s father.
Lalit, it seems, started believing that he was possessed by his father’s
ghost, who dictated his views on what the family had to do to attain
prosperity and spiritual enlightenment. On the night the family died,
they were in the midst of a prescribed ritual. They may not have
expected to die. According to an entry in a diary, they thought they
would somehow return from the ritual. By most signs, this was a family
that wanted to live. Yet, one man persuaded them to meticulously plan
their own death.

A little known quality of delusion is that it is infectious. A person
who is severely deluded can transfer it to someone in close contact with
him. Some psychologists and psychiatrists refer to it as ‘folie à deux’,
French for the madness of two, or, in clinical terms, a shared
psychosis. But an imperfect translation of the French expression offers
greater philosophical accuracy: ‘the folly of two’.

Milder forms of the-folly-of-two are more common than we would like to
accept. There is evidence all around us. A man starts to think everyone
in his office is out to get him; and his wife soon starts seeing that.
Someone suspects the water is contaminated, and the rest of the family
begins to get the odour. This does not look like a mental disorder;
probably just poor mental health. We associate insanity only with the
extraordinary because we think sanity is a majority condition.

The folly-of-two assumes the more serious name of ‘shared psychosis’
when people die, or become dangerous. Like when, a few years ago, two
sisters shut themselves in their house and starved for many days until
they were found. One of the sisters had started hearing their dead
mother warning them that the world was trying to poison them, and the
other sister also began hearing those voices, corroborating the
delusion.

People of sound mental health are poor liars. To fool others, you need
to first fool yourself. That is why the most influential spiritual gurus
are never charlatans; they believe every word they say. That is how they
infect. Shared psychosis is not only the transfer of an idea between two
people; it is usually a transmission to many. And it appears that most
people in the world are susceptible to secondary reception of a
delusion. This is because a delusion can be very interesting.

The Bhatias of Burari, according to their neighbours, were an
unremarkable family of seemingly sane and loveable people. Yet, Lalit
had apparently convinced his family of not just one extraordinary
phenomenon, but several. He made them believe in the ghost of his
father, and that he was the deceased’s chosen medium, and that they must
behave in particular ways, and that if they performed special rituals,
something paranormal would occur.

When people recount the Burari deaths, they marvel at their own
disbelief. The family had the trappings of modernity. There is a popular
assumption that people who went to college or wear jeans are ‘rational’.
But people do get swayed by a spectacular idea.

Lalit was in the spell of a powerful delusion. Despite that, or because
of it, he had domestic gravitas. Though he wasn’t the eldest brother, he
took over the family’s reins through the force of personality,
eventually persuading them to climb a stool with nooses around their
necks for a supernatural moment. In another age, Lalit could have
started a religion.

The history of the world is the history of influence, and hence the
history of delusion. Typically, a man sees a vision and begins to tell a
captivating story. People misunderstand him, depending on their own
mental states, and they think they see what he sees. And the ancient
vision spreads, survives for centuries and lives among us.

People scoff at Lalit, but spirituality itself may have emerged from
circumstances not too dissimilar. The sane trying to imitate the
inimitable; all our tumults emerge from that. The spirits, the
spiritual, the climate-paranoids, the enlightened—what if all of them
were only Lalits, in a way, but Lalits who could persuade more than nine
or ten?

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
