# Let’s celebrate what the RSS chief said about new India

*2021-07-11*

In 1992, Pope John Paul II admitted that the Earth goes around the Sun.
Thus, 350 years after the Church punished Galileo Galilei for saying the
same thing, it stated that he had a point after all and that if only his
evidence were not so shoddy, the Vatican of his times would not have so
inconvenienced him. Whether John Paul II really believed the Earth goes
around the Sun is not the most important thing about the event; it is
that he chose to say it.

A few days ago, one of the most influential men in India said something
just as obvious. Some people said they did not think he meant a word of
it; they missed the most significant aspect of the event—that he said
what he said.

Mohan Bhagwat, chief of the Rashtriya Swayamsewak Sangh (RSS), the
ideological mentor of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), said,
“Those who lynch go against Hindutva." In a nation where mobs have
lynched Muslims, usually on allegations of ferrying cows for slaughter,
and a perception has grown across the world that the BJP condones crimes
against Muslims, here was the church of Hindu nationalism deeming the
act a crime.

His speech was largely ignored by the media. Instead, it should have
been celebrated. One reason why it got little attention has something to
with the corrupt nature of storytelling—good news, hope and happiness do
not travel as far as bad things. Also, even considering the idea that
the RSS is humane will rob many self-diagnosed humanitarians of material
and purpose. But some reasons why his speech was not widely admired by
gatekeepers of the Indian conscience have substance. He was speaking to
a tactical outreach wing of the RSS, Muslim Rashtriya Manch. As Bhagwat
himself said, everytime the RSS has said sensible things about Muslims,
“we are not trusted". And similar statements in the past did not
appreciably reduce the abuse and threats faced by Muslims.

Even so, it is extraordinary that he said Indians who harm Muslims
should not be considered Hindu. The head of a powerful Hindu
nationalistic organization excommunicating, even if only metaphorically,
murderous Hindus deserves praise from anyone who loves people, India and
sanity. As in the case of the Pope, it does not matter what Bhagwat
believes. I do think, though, that the Pope was certain the Earth goes
around the Sun, and Bhagwat considers Muslim-killers abhorrent and
useless to his Hindu cause. Like the Church, the RSS is stepping into
modernity. But unlike the Church of 1992, which feared becoming obsolete
if it did not start making sense, the RSS of 2021 is speaking common
sense because it is more self-assured than ever. Some battle has been
won, and it does not require the language of lament.

That anyone who kills a Muslim is a criminal is not the only obvious but
extraordinary statement in Bhagwat’s speech. In anticipation of how the
speech will be received, he said, “This is not an image makeover… We
don’t have to morph to do anything in this country." He said the RSS was
not a political organization. “Yes, we do have some thoughts about how
to run the nation, and we do exert pressure, and we do use our heft
during the elections to push our ideas…" You could sense a ‘but’ coming.
“There are some important things politics cannot achieve…Uniting people
is beyond the capacity of politics." He said this without sanctimony, in
a matter-of-fact way. Some Hindus, he said, “who may actually be very
good people will say I have become naive". But, he said, he had complete
faith in the co-existence of Hindus and Muslims.

To douse “the fear in Muslims that the Sangh wants to finish them off",
he argued that a majority of Hindus do not wish them harm. “A man can
appear menacing and deliver a pugnacious speech to Hindus about violent
Hindu nationalism, but Hindus will not accept it." If this is true, it
would seem many speeches of BJP politicians have been useless.

Bhagwat then meanders a bit to build an esoteric image of the typical
Hindu as a very nice guy. But for this small detour into magic realism,
his speech is the finest on the idea of India that I have heard in
recent times. And, because of who he is, it was also the most
convincing. Here I list some of the other points he made:

“It takes time for everyone (Hindus) to get wise."

“Dialogue (between Hindus and Muslims) is the only solution."

“People who wish to defile any religion have no place in Indian
society."

“Some people argue that those who conquered them once deserve to be
lorded over now. No. This is the age of democracy. Hindu Rashtra is not
a Hindu-only nation."

That this speech was not celebrated by the usual lamenters of Hindu
nationalism points to a form of narrow-minded intellectualism that
results in miserly praise for anyone who is different from them. Many
crusaders who appear to seek solutions are often in the business of
preserving problems.

But then, we did not see ecstatic responses from temple-going Hindus
either. They are not cultural orphans, and many of them hold the RSS in
high regard. That also points to something.

The difference between the influential and ‘influencers’ is that the
influential are public figures with real power, like Bhagwat. But both
the influential and influencers today exist in a world where influence
is over. They are mere corroborators. When they articulate a destructive
thought that millions have thought, they are amplified. When they make
sense that stirs no mojo, they are ignored.
