# Making the most of our time left with ageing parents

*2021-08-15*

In the end, he lost his own memories. He would scan his books as though
he had never read them before. “Sometimes, when closing a book, he would
be surprised to find his photograph on the back cover, so he would
reopen it and attempt to read it again," writes his first son, Rodrigo
Garcia, in *A Farewell to Gabo and Mercedes*, a son’s memoir of the
ageing of his parents.

The book, which was released a few days ago, took me to situations many
of us face or will soon face with aged parents as they stagger into the
final phase of their active lives. I am not speaking of those parents
who are on their death beds, rather of those who might be somewhat
healthy, by the low standards of our country and despite the fast carbs
they consume in the name of habit and tradition.

I speak to my mother almost every day. I want to make most of our time
together; I don’t take her presence for granted. We don’t know what to
say, though. So we say the same things to each other almost every day.
Some days she tells me the plot lines of the stories she plans to write.
She finds the actual writing, the mechanical part, very laborious, but
she enjoys the thinking part. And the part where she gets to tell the
stories to anyone who would listen.

I speak to my father, too, more often than I thought I would when I was
a boy. We, too, have nothing much to say, but at least we have current
affairs.

Once, when Garcia Marquez was eighty, his son asked what it was like to
be so old. “The view from eighty is astonishing, really. And the end is
near."

“Are you afraid?"

“It makes me immensely sad."

Marquez was a man who lived a large life, filled with friends and
laughter and incidents. As a character in his novel, *Love in the Time
of Cholera* says, “I discovered to my joy, that it is life, not death,
that has no limits."

But in the end, as it happens to other old people, like our parents, his
life shrank to his immediate family, and he wanted to increase time with
his children. But they had their own lives.

Even after he lost his mind and did not recognize his own son anymore,
when Rodrigo Garcia would say goodbye, the old man would hold on to his
boy, “No, man, why are you leaving? Stay. Don’t leave me."

Old age is a caste. The old long to be with the young, but they are
expected to be with others who are old. And all around them, their
friends keep dying, people who once shared their best memories. With the
death of every friend, they move that much closer to anonymity. As
Garcia Marquez said of the trend among his peers, “A lot of people are
dying that weren’t dying before."

Every decade of our lives, some topics of conversation vanish and new
ones appear. In my 20s, peers spoke a lot about their parents,
especially bad parents, but in my 30s, all talk of parents vanished. Now
parents surface again—for their poor health, chiefly. I sense people do
not have severe opinions of their parents anymore. They are not giants
anymore. They have, finally, been forgiven.

When they were raising us, we knew of a fact—parents do not really know
their children as much as they think they do. But then, when we begin to
probe our parents, as we finally sit down and ask questions about their
lives and they finally answer truthfully, we realize that children do
not know their parents either.

“I spent fifty years of my life not knowing that my father had no vision
in the center of his left eye," Rodrigo writes. But this is certainly
among the innocuous things he did not know about his father, a man who
said, probably several times, “Everyone has three lives: the public, the
private and the secret."

Rodrigo illuminates the phases children go though as they watch their
parents age. The hospital visits become frequent, and in the miasma they
realize that medical marvels are aimed not at prolonging life, but at
prolonging death. The physical decay is just the start. Then the mind
goes. Then children have to make brave decisions about saving their
parents from hospitals. All through this, the old desperately want to
live, and to live well.

As his father lay dying, Rodrigo observes, “It’s a dizzying sensation to
know the destiny of a human being." Eventually, the heart of Garcia
Marquez stopped sooner than the doctors had predicted. One thing he
hated about his own death, “was that it would be the only aspect of his
life he would not be able to write about."

Looking at his body, his wife for nearly six decades, said, “Poor little
thing, isn’t he?"

She was one of the most famous literary muses and the subject of her
husband’s standard but memorable book dedication, “For Mercedes, of
course."

In the years that followed, her body too would fall apart. But she would
smoke even when she had to be on oxygen, sometimes asking her son to
hold the mask as she took a few puffs. Then she, too, was gone.

“The death of the second parent is like looking through a telescope one
night and no longer finding a planet that has always been there. It has
vanished, with its religion, its customs, its own peculiar habits and
rituals, big and small."

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
