# India’s problem is its romance with informality

*2021-04-25*

I believe that India would have exerted considerable control over the
pandemic in less than two months. I risk this optimistic guess not
because readers have a short memory, but because of a few respectable
reasons. India handles calamities well (in the end). Once a phenomenon
becomes a calamity, India knows how to be exceptional. This is partly
because what the country lacks in the form of order, it compensates for
in informal ways. Heroes rise; private money pours; men and women do
more than they need to. Even politicians, bureaucrats and billionaires,
operating outside the system, create ad hoc solutions that actually
work.

It may be difficult to see all this at the moment, as India is in the
grip of a humanitarian disaster. Hospitals are under severe strain.
There is vaccine scarcity, and a more dire oxygen shortage. Hospitals
are turning away the dying. First, it was the public that was pleading
online for help, then it was doctors, now hospitals. Government
helplines have collapsed. Almost all government statistics appear to be
incorrect. And there appears to be a vast undercount of deaths.

India is this way because we have no talent for systems. Many of our
problems arise from this. A nation that has long struggled to draw
straight lines on roads to mark medians and borders, given its innate
disrespect for straight lines, will naturally have many other problems.
We are repelled by order, processes, protocols, rules, planning, and the
straightness of a straight line. I think we escaped the full curse of
the central planning era because the planning part was lousy. We are an
informal nation, addicted to the happiness of informality, a commune of
natural villagers who deeply resent the urbanity of the modern process.
We are good at maintaining social norms, but in everything else, our
instinct is to wing it. In this, there is something very ancient about
us.

This is behind not only India’s poor response to the second wave, but
also the fact that somewhere, as a hospital awaits oxygen, an oxygen
tanker arrives but starts to leak, and somewhere else a fire breaks out
in an intensive care unit, killing covid patients.

People who could have sprung up on their feet in days are instead dying,
chiefly because India did not anticipate or prepare for the second wave
of a disease that had given us advance notice. Instead of bracing for an
approaching tsunami, some Indians began to quietly gloat over a
specialness about themselves that saved them from the plight of
Americans, Brazilians and Europeans.

Ideally, all this should not surprise us, but the one dignity we offer
ourselves is the right to be surprised by our country. As though we have
seen far better times.

We are good at following a system if the clear consequence of a systemic
failure is death. As in civil aviation. We do manage very well to fly
without falling. Also, once people reach a stage that puts them on
hospital beds, in the face of such clear optics of misery, India usually
moves in admirable ways.

This is why my covid prognosis in India is so optimistic. Also, there is
the precedence of the United States. Indians forget, but what the US
went through when covid peaked was worse than what is going on in India
today. There, too, hospitals were collapsing, people died in hospital
corridors, and there were mass funerals. Even after accounting for the
fact that the section of the American media that is popular in India was
anti-Donald Trump, and so its pandemic coverage was a sort of political
whiplash, it is hard to dispute that the US was reeling from the disease
in ways that were similar to what India is going through.

There is a big difference, though, between the American disenchantment
with their government and Indian. We have a far greater sense of failure
because we have a very low opinion of our country. The second wave of
the pandemic is only a confirmation of this opinion. Our children, who
always start off as patriots, have no real pride anymore in their
nation. India’s handling of the second wave has only lowered an already
low opinion held by many of us.

As a result, some of India’s reasonable explanations for why we are
suffering today are not appreciated enough. A few days ago, our external
affairs minister S. Jaishankar answered the question of why India is
short of vaccine doses despite being a producer of these. Apart from
India’s contractual export obligations, he said, we are dependent on
other nations for some important vaccine ingredients, and so did not
have a practical or moral reason to deny those countries vaccine
supplies, especially when India’s deaths were very low. Now that covid
is a major calamity, India can withhold the export of vaccines.

Even so, this is a time for us to whip ourselves. That is another thing
we’re good at—whipping ourselves. This is good. We have gained more from
shame in our present than pride in our rumoured heritage.

But then we forget. Our civilizational shame is fleeting. Once the
pandemic subsides, we will forget the terrifying days when people were
dying around us and Indian hospitals were begging for help from the
media and courts. We derive our peace and hope from forgetting.
