# What startup entrepreneurs could learn from writers

*2021-11-14*

The past few days, people who follow the news began to see images of a
sari-clad entrepreneur who they would soon learn is the founder of the
online retail store, Nykaa. After her company began trading on Indian
stock markets last week, Falguni Nayar became a billionaire, and hence
another inspiring figure. Inspiration is a feeling people get when they
derive from successful people all the wrong causes and impediments of
success. And so there was much talk about her age, the fact that she was
50 when she started her business, that she was a woman, and so on. What
people never know are the actual reasons for someone’s success.

Even so, inspiration is the most powerful emotion of our times. Feeling
it, seeking it. It emerges from a subdued form of sorrow called hope.
Across Indian cities today, the young and the middle-aged wish to be
entrepreneurs. They wish to be rich. Working for a company is merely a
temporary arrangement until an exceptional idea comes to them, or until
they execute such an idea that has already come to them. Or, maybe, most
of them don’t have ideas. They want to be wealthy entrepreneurs but they
don’t know yet what their enterprise is going to be, even though they do
love that quote about how wealth is a by-product of doing what you love.
One thing inspiring people don’t tell you is that you need more luck to
realize what you love than to make money.

Despite the dullness and illogic of most successful entrepreneurs,
millions seek to absorb insights from them. As the hopeful wait, they
routinely hear of some startup raising millions in some round, or a new
company going for an initial public offer. What does so much
inspiration, hope and intended imitation do to a society? It makes
people unhappy, jealous, bitter and other things that are useful for
success. But they need one more layer of information.

A few years ago, I was invited by a publisher to be in conversation with
the British-Pakistani writer, Mohsin Hamid, to discuss his new novel,
How to Get Filthy Rich in Rising Asia. Once members of the audience
started asking questions, I figured why they had come. They thought the
book was a serious how-to-get-rich guide. But in a way, they were in the
right place. There is much that aspiring entrepreneurs can learn from
writers. Also, from filmmakers and other artists. People don’t realise
that artists are entrepreneurs. I wish I could say what you need to
learn from them is how to be. And maybe you can. But they offer a more
valuable lesson in what not to be. They are a foreboding of what is
going to happen to you and why you have to be a better person than a
writer and others of that bent.

It is possible that the reason writers and art filmmakers talk so much
about public ethics and morality is that they have very little of these
in their private lives. All of us have a quota of goodness we need to
fulfil. So people who do not know how to be kind at home are often the
ones who speak of macro-kindness, of national or global proportions. But
one strand of their public morality also comes from the bitterness of
failure and jealousy. That is why they commonly attack their more
successful peers on moral and ideological grounds.

The recent success of young and middle-class entrepreneurs has created
the notion that the startup culture emerges from equal opportunity. This
is largely a myth because there is a lot of social equity hidden in
startup funding. Yet, strong perceptions of merit persist in this new
economy, and that deepens the sense of failure in a majority who are yet
to make it. And I am beginning to see the same sad circles of
disgruntled people as seen in the arts, wasting their time talking ill
of those who have made it.

I do not wish to deny anyone the agony of envy. After all, it is a
natural sentiment between equals, and all talented people who believe
they are worthy of success would feel envious of their more successful
peers. But when envy turns into sustained bitterness, it causes
hyper-morality, which is the prevailing madness in the artistic world.
Behind those men who call other men “misogynists", behind the
accusations of “bigotry", behind the moral indignation of the art-house
is usually just petty jealousy and a subconscious attempt to eliminate
competition.

I see this happening among talented entrepreneurs whose startups are
languishing. Their sense of failure and jealousy makes them speak the
language of social morality. When we think we’re better than others, we
tend to lose our humour, and humour is not merely the ability to be
funny. It is the ability to laugh at our own circumstances, and that is
a form of clarity. When people surrender their clarity, they unwittingly
get recruited in larger political and corporate games.

Mainstream commercial art is a democracy where public opinion delivers
either rewards or punishment. But for the middle and high arts, a cartel
decides for all of us what is good. Here, validation is the currency.
This infection has already permeated the very heart of our new
capitalism. Disenchanted entrepreneurs who have been denied material
success seek compensation in more abstract kinds of validation. At an
innocuous level, they do things like creating a corrupt culture of
awards and prestige. At a more serious level, their disenchantment has
transformed into hyper-moral activism.

For instance, some disgruntled entrepreneurs who have taken to posturing
call themselves “ethicists", and some of them create or fan fears around
technology, privacy, enterprise and billionaires. And what was denied to
them in the form of material success, they make up through acclaim.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
