# Why contentment usually does not lead to happiness

*2021-07-18*

In the film *World War Z*, a family in New York is stranded in morning
traffic when a mysterious disease breaks out, transforming the infected
into zombies. The family, whose athletic patriarch is a former United
Nations investigator, played by Brad Pitt, escape the roads that are now
teeming with violent zombies, and run into a residential building where
a migrant family give them refuge. I would have hid here for months
until a vaccine is found, but the former UN investigator prepares to
leave, and asks everyone to go with him. His experience of dangerous
places has taught him “people who moved survived” and those who didn’t
perished. “Movement is life.”

It may not be obvious at first glance, but the 19th century American
industrialist Andrew Carnegie said almost the same thing. And what is
counter-intuitive from the mouth of Brad Pitt seems intuitive told by
Carnegie.

Carnegie, in a magazine article, defended the vast inequality between
rich industrialists and the rest as a natural result of prosperity. An
industrialist who does not have suicidal tendencies has no option but to
keep growing. To be content is to perish. There is no “middle ground
which such men can occupy, because the great manufacturing or commercial
concern which does not earn at least interest upon its capital soon
becomes bankrupt. It must either go forward or fall behind: to stand
still is impossible.”

We are able to see why a corporation cannot be content; why it can only
surge ahead or collapse. Yet, most people do not see how the same
principle works in individuals too. In fact, we are taught that
contentment is a big virtue, that it is a state of satisfaction attained
with some success. After all our reasonable material needs are
fulfilled, we are told, we must not hanker for more and more.
Contentment is stillness, it is peace, it is equilibrium. It is a nicer
word for falling behind.

If ambition is a capacity for unhappiness, contentment is the talent for
happiness. Maybe because I am a South Indian, I have known many content
types. I myself was one once, but then the zombies came for me.

I have known people who have escaped their circumstances through hard
work and then grown content; the young from affluent families who
decided not to work too hard or get trapped “in the rat race” and
instead “do theatre”; people who got great lucky starts and breaks in
their lives and encashed it for a peaceful life of not wanting more than
a comfortable life. Most of them are bitter today. Contentment, it turns
out, does not lead to happiness.

As with a company, if you are not moving forward, you are slipping
backwards. There are non-esoteric reasons for this. Contentment is a
middle ground. The very poor cannot possess it. It emerges from a
material state that is not very low. As the content stay still, others
around them prosper, reducing the value of the middle ground. This is
what happened to a whole thin class of Mumbai’s refined rich. When I
moved to the city in the mid-90s, they still ruled the place; they
occupied prime real estate and influenced culture and dining. People on
Malabar Hill spoke of jazz. But then new money overtook them and made
being rich very expensive. Prosperity has inflationary properties. Thus
the material middle ground of old money has been so devalued, it does
not feel like middle ground anymore. A major voice in Mumbai’s activism
today is just old content millionaires cursing new billionaires.

The defining quality of the content types is bitterness. Once, they were
smug. They could be both content and successful at the same time. So
they thought their happiness emerged from their contentment. In reality,
it emerged from facile success. But then, as their peers progressed,
their assets lost value, they lost prestige, they aged, they became
obsolete and maintaining contentment itself became increasingly
expensive.

Like many South Indians, I am naturally inclined to be content. I had
very few opportunities to know this early in my life. But in my 30s, I
went through a period when everything had fallen in place—I found some
money, a home that I always wanted, appreciation, prospects, lots of
prospects. I decayed in a state of mild happiness for five years. Then,
I remember walking home one evening and I felt I was in the rot of a
very good life. It was not bad at all; I am a fan of happiness. But it
was also boring. Also, my encounters with content artists forewarned me
that it is not a good way to be. That phoney aura about them of not
wishing for more, and that bitterness in them at having been left
behind, that was hell. So people like me who are afflicted with
contentment but are wary of its effects, adopt the strategy of serial,
episodic contentment. Use the unhappiness of ambition to achieve an end,
wallow in contentment until it becomes the rot of a good life, and allow
a new restlessness to set in, leap again towards another goal, and so
on.

Even in fitness, the content are doomed. As the metabolic rate slows,
what used to work doesn’t anymore and the body decays without the
marvellous ambitions of the restless spirit.

There is something cruel about all this. That if you are still, you rot.
If you do not have ambitions, you can be destroyed by a sudden
phenomenon, like a pandemic. But then should the fear of destruction
change our character? Isn’t there something beautiful in the fact that
our finest artists, scientists and entrepreneurs adore smallness?

The problem is not in the scale of success or even the devaluation of
the middle ground. Contentment is bliss, so long as the people who have
it also have the humour to tolerate being overtaken by the restless.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
