# Our Olympic team vests say 'India'. It should be prefixed with ‘despite’

*2021-08-01*

A blatant lie is on the vests of some Olympians in Tokyo. It reads
“India". It should actually read “Despite India". The very existence of
Indian athletes of global calibre is not because of India, but in spite
of India. That is why I plan to form an Olympic bloc called ‘Despite
India’.

Russia, banned from the Olympics for its state-sponsored doping
programmes, is allowed to compete as ROC, which stands for ‘Russian
Olympic Committee’ (but the full form is not recognized because the word
‘Russia’ is banned at the Olympics for now). Citing this as a precedent,
I hope to persuade the International Olympic Committee to allow me to
raise a team called ‘DI’.

The Olympics often reverberate with the lies of nations. That is what
anthems usually are. The typical anthem is a very bad poem written by a
poet who was friends with the strongman of his times who had the power
to pick a national song. No wonder anthems are generally low-brow
cliches about the greatness and goodness of a group of people. The
anthem of ‘Despite India’ will be different—it will be an honest song,
rendered as an angry rap about a nation that is cruel to the poor, which
has no facilities for children to play competitive games, whose stadiums
are mostly torturous structures where the experience of watching sports
is among the worst in the world, where most towns have no modern
training of athletes, scientific advice or healthcare. A nation that
offers nothing much to its athletes but is dominated by a lumbering
elite and middle class hungry for sporting pride.

There is justice in the Olympics. The world works very hard and spends
billions of dollars to humiliate the Indian middle-class once every four
years. As the games proceed, people divide India’s population by the
number of the medals it has won; they mention the size of tiny nations
that have performed better; and they remember the fact that India has
never hosted the Olympics.

A sporting talent is an immense burden for the person who has it. People
who have any exceptional talent in any field are enslaved by it because
they have to nurture it and attain their full potential, or they will
forever be consumed by the bitterness of failure. That is why society is
so important to the talented.

But then to be young in India and been talented in any sport other than
cricket is among the great human misfortunes. The whole nation seems
designed to treat every Indian as a poor person. Any comfort, even
air-conditioning, is wrongly perceived by administrators as a luxury. If
you have ever been on a school or college team, and participated in
government-run competitions, you will know how gloomy the sports scene
is.

Athletics and swimming meets, even in a city like Delhi, are
impoverished, unhygienic and chaotic affairs. Even karate, which is
relatively upscale, is run by a provincial bunch of middle-agers who
seem to relish starting events many hours late.

The talented poor do not know that they deserve better; that it is very
easy for their nation to organize meets that start on time, provide
bottled water for every athlete, offer hotel accommodation instead of
lodging contestants in unused railway compartments, offer shelters so
that athletes don’t wait for their events in the hot sun, ensure that
girls are not harassed and no one has to endure the petty politics of
sports administrators who use sporting federations as spring-boards to
low-rung politics.

Until recently, a typical humiliation that was in store for many female
Indian athletes was the accusation that they were men. It would usually
come as a shock to them because their testosterone levels were never
tested at any point in their domestic careers as athletes. It was only
once they started participating in major international competitions that
they were tested. Today, such athletes are spared because of a global
confusion over the definition of a woman, especially a female athlete,
and a moratorium on gender tests in many sporting disciplines.

You may argue that things are better today for Indian athletes. True,
but we should stop congratulating ourselves for minor feats. In any
case, other nations, even middle-income nations, have progressed much
faster than India.

Despite India’s poor assistance to athletes, they have to endure the
expectations of the middle class that yearns for national pride. Every
failure of Indian athletes evokes public anger. So we have one of the
most unfit societies in the world, with a majority who cannot sprint 50
metres, filled with strong opinions about athletes who have reached the
global stage despite the mediocrity of their politicians and
administrators.

Indian nationalism is chiefly about the rich recruiting the poor to do
the difficult job of making India proud. A few months ago, someone on
social media identified a buffalo-racer named Srinivasa Gowda as India’s
response to Usain Bolt. In buffalo racing, an athlete chases two reined
buffaloes. Gowda was timed at covering the 142-metre stretch in 13.42
seconds. Some other people then did the math and declared he was a major
sprinter. There was a frenzy. Politicians, too, celebrated him. He was
invited to the national sprint trials. But Gowda was smart. He declined.
He knew that the buffalos contributed to his pace. And he saved himself
from becoming a transient spectacle created to entertain facile
patriots.

However, many others who are more talented than Gowda in conventional
sprints have to endure race trials, and some of them eventually get to
wear that blue vest on which is printed a famous lie.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
