# The tyranny of background music in our public spaces

*2021-12-19*

In some restaurants, the music is so loud that you wonder why people are
made to sit facing each other. In most cafes, the music is faint but you
know it is there, like invisible fumes from vehicles. Wherever you go
today, music seeps out of speakers. In restaurants, cafes, elevators,
lobbies, airports, aircraft cabins, trains and taxies. It is there in
films, of course, even when characters are talking, or when they are
dead, or when a deaf person watches the world go by. There is no greater
absurdity in art than background music. It is also there in exercise
lessons on YouTube, cooking shows, wildlife documentaries and
journalism. Most cat videos don’t have music only because pet owners do
not know how to add it, or it takes too much effort.

It is as though the world is afraid of silence. Somehow we have reached
a place where silence has become a form of gloom, or foreboding, like an
omen in a marriage that some misdemeanour has been committed.

The defence of background music in real life is that it creates ‘a
mood’, and ‘an ambience’. But there are several flaws in this
hypothesis. Who can claim to know what music creates what mood in you?

A few days ago, in the lobby of a hotel in Mumbai, I heard Nessun Dorma,
the melancholy aria. Maybe the hotel wished to convey class, but then
what is the neural connection between European operatic melancholy and
the new rich of Mumbai in an orbit around an Indian buffet? Also, the
context of that aria is this: An unexpected stranger manages to win a
contest to marry a princess, but she finds him repulsive; so he says if
you guess my name, kill me. But if you can’t guess my name, you must
marry me. And the psychotic princess then decrees that the people of her
kingdom must find out his name, or all of them would be killed. Nessun
Dorma is the lament of the suitor for how much he wants this weird lady.
Who would want this sort of ‘mood’? Is a mood then a consequence of not
knowing too much about the music, the very source of the mood?

Even if you don’t know the context or history of a piece of music, it
can be torture. For a few years, one Delhi airport terminal played Hindi
film songs from the 1980s, most of which were a disgrace to anyone with
eardrums. Not only that, jingles were played in between. Most people did
not mind.

Even today, most people seem unaffected by background music. They even
seem to want it. The persistence of this music everywhere is a part of
the tyranny of the majority. As a result, some of the greatest classics
of the European enlightenment have become air in a lobby, a mere sound
to comfort people who are unsettled by silence.

When you turn off the ambient music, it ejects people from ‘the mood’,
and without it, they get bored. Cab drivers tend to display a dislike of
customers who ask them to turn off the music. They usually only turn
down the sound because the air is too still for them otherwise.

I have heard several people wonder how “real life" would feel if it had
background music, “like in the movies". By this they mean that an event
in their lives would be followed by their mood, and the mood would be
followed by appropriate music. But this is the exact reverse of what
happens in cinema. The background music not only creates the mood, it
anticipates an event, and even defines the very genre of the film.

In cinema, and many other things that cinema is called today (‘series’
for example), music is more than ambience; it is a very specific and
powerful nudge.

Not just that.

Without background music, time expands and a story becomes very real. In
fact, many art-house films are overestimated as realism only because
they don’t have background music.

Just as silence is adored a bit too much by art house and its disciples,
the mainstream has an excess of background score.

For instance, Marvel’s superhero films are so filled with anthem-like
music that a moment of silence is the actual music, which lends the
required gravitas.

The most foolish use of background score in mainstream cinema is when
filmmakers use it to cue dialogues. I want to ask them—are you so unsure
of your lines, or do you have such low regard for the faculties of
people who watch your films that you need to create a mood for
dialogues?

The tyranny of background music in mainstream big-budget cinema has
created a situation where you cannot really follow dialogues anymore
without reading the accompanying subtitles. Christopher Nolan’s Tenet
was in particular focus for unintelligible dialogues because its
background score is so overpowering. Not that the film would have made
much sense even if you understood the dialogues.

However, this is not the most corrupt or absurd use of background music
in mass communication. That is, if you have seen some of the new
sanctimonious ‘documentaries’ that have been coming out of the United
States. The use of alarmist music in journalism is as much a violation
of the profession’s promise to convey the truth as any bias or activist
agenda.

A good thing about reading is that it is safe from background music. But
I think, a day will arrive when a publisher would come up with the idea
of introducing background music to an e-book.

Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’
