# What truly keeps people happy in such unhappy times

*2021-05-02*

A new question is in the air. What must you do to find joy in these
times? It is a question that presumes you are sad, that even insists you
are sad. So it looks you in the eye even if you have not lost someone
dear, and you are not enduring the torture of caring for someone, which
today could include the task of dragging a bleak, industrial oxygen
cylinder. Even if you have been spared for now, there is an assumption
that you are slowly sinking in second-order melancholy. After all, there
is death all around, and a sense of inevitability.

So, what are people doing to make themselves feel better? Nothing much.

Most people do nothing special to feel happy. They are just happy. When
they are lucky, they are happy, and when they are unlucky they are sad,
but all arcs of their lives bend towards joy. In happiness they are not
amateurs; they don’t over-articulate joy. Their whole lives are built
around being happy. So what they now do is stick to a semblance of a
routine, and surrender to habits. They work, chat, watch a lot of
television, watch T20, read, play badminton on the street assuming it
will keep them fit, lament that the gyms are shut as though they used to
go every day, and they eat a lot of fast carbs. As before. They did all
this more or less the same way before the pandemic. A typical Indian
does many things in a single day to be happy in different ways without
even knowing the motive. And most people achieve happiness because the
bar is so low.

There are others who are happy in a more complex way, which they
consider a higher order of happiness, a self-assigned high place in a
secret caste hierarchy of living. They don’t need to be entertained by a
story, or a piece of news, or by sugar. In not expecting happiness in
all three meals a day, or every hour, they imagine they have liberated
themselves from animal biology. Thus, when happiness does occur, they
feel it more than the others because it is so much rarer. They, too,
were exactly like this before the pandemic, and they too have not gone
in pursuit of happiness. They too are pros at happiness.

There is an old golden piece of advice in long-distance running. Don’t
buy new shoes for the race day. It is the novice who runs a race in new
shoes. Seasoned runners don’t do anything different on race day; they
stick to everything that is old, including their water bottles and
bandanas and watch straps, everything that is deeply familiar to their
skin.

Most people who have gotten away from the pandemic so far without being
directly struck by tragedy do not feel the obligatory sorrow that the
question in the air presumes because they found joy in what is familiar
to them, in their habits, and in staying true to who they are. They
don’t even ask questions about how to be happy in a pandemic, or at
least ask this in a serious way. They are just happy. So where has the
question come from?

The question has emanated from people who talk the most about happiness.
People who have for long been dejected, long before the pandemic. They
have some interest in the answer, but they love questions more than
answers. Most people who say, “Have you felt so dark before, so helpless
before, so hopeless before,” know that the answer is yes, they have felt
so sad before, in different circumstances. The articulation of ‘how to
be happy’ is often an articulation of sorrow.

The question has also come from psychologists and psychiatrists.This is
because they are ‘qualified’ to have answers to such questions, which
they then transmit. That is how the question has come to linger in the
air.

Not everyone finds joy in bleak times by just being themselves. Some
people are donating money to noble causes for the first time. Even
people who know that every taxpayer is a philanthropist cannot help
donating, because it brings them joy.

Some have decided not to feel the pain of other people, and they read
news of the unfolding misery as though it is some kind of realistic
fiction happening in another dimension. This form of protection from
sorrow is more common than people are ready to admit.

Some have found comfort in becoming the guardians of appropriate sorrow.
They condemn jokes and festivities, and the overt public happiness of
the Indian Premier League (IPL). I am confident that they privately do
watch Netflix “in these bleak times”, but they find other people’s
public display of joy disgusting. They are like that grim relative every
family has, who expects everyone to be in mournful silence when he is
ill. Oddly enough, many of the people who oppose IPL matches as
insensitive are surely among those who condemn thugs who enforce homage
to a departed politician or actor by closing half a city down. This
sanctimony, too—this expectation that everyone should be like you, be as
emotional as you—is a way of manufacturing comfort from ambient fear.

But a majority of people find happiness through regular means, like by
seeking entertainment, such as the IPL tournament. However, they are
wary of the guardians of appropriate sorrow. They fear being perceived
as bad people. So they have become secretive even about watching
cricket. And when they want to share something good that has happened to
them, they break the news with the preface, “In these sad times, finally
some good news”, without realizing that in ‘bleak times’ the last thing
people want to know about is something good happening to other people.
