# The agonizing wait for the decline of America

*2021-09-26*

In the horror film *Get Out*, a secret fellowship of Caucasians lures
talented African-Americans into their custody, often by saying all the
right things to them. And then they transplant the brains of wealthy
Whites into their victims, who start behaving like affluent Whites.
While watching it, I thought this film could be about how American
newspapers lure Indian opinion writers and transplant America inside
them, after which they start writing like Americans.

Every Indian who watches *Get Out* may think it is about how the minds
of their peers are rebooted to imitate Americans: The startup guy who
did engineering as his parents insisted, married their pick of spouse,
and produced ‘we-two-ours-two’ kids, and now suddenly want to “disrupt",
that venture capitalist who indulges in a mission Asians almost never
used to have—saving the world. That economist who knows the castes of
his friends and foes but now talks of “Clash of Civilizations" as though
it is some new thought. That writer who has started saying, “I am so
stoked." And Indians who never read a single Indian newspaper but
subscribe to *The New York Times.*

It is so easy for the US to co-opt the most refined, educated, talented
and affluent sections (all of these are mutually exclusive) of the
developing world, and make them comical imitators of some American
ideal. But for many years now, we have been hearing that the US is in
decline. The recent fiasco of its hasty withdrawal from Afghanistan has
served as further evidence of its decay. And that it is not as
influential politically, that not many nations are scared of it, that it
has its own economic problems, that China has eroded its clout, and
that, all things considered, America is not the great place it used to
be. If US politics is ever united, it is in conveying the dirge that the
country is sinking.

But that is not the sense you get when you are outside the US, and
perhaps outside the paywalls of its self-flagellating liberal media. In
all important ways, the US is an extraordinary nation. They talk a lot
about what is wrong with them (because they talk a lot about
everything), but they identify and solve their economic problems with
exceptional speed. Their science is stronger than before; their
financial industry thrives, their entertainment, which is honest because
it is primarily for domestic consumption, still enthralls the world. A
high proportion of the developing world’s young wish to live there. The
chief aim of upper middle-class Indian schooling is to deposit children
and a chunk of their parents’ wealth in America in the name of higher
education. And what is called ‘global literature’ or ‘global cinema’ is
what America’s artistic establishment considers cutely foreign but still
familiar. If anything, America is growing more influential. Chiefly
because of its flaws. All its bumbles and wounds and all that
chest-beating make it more real and humbler than Rambo’s America.

The decline of America is more humanities lament than fact. But the
decline itself, if it happens, may not be a bad thing for the rest of
the world.

Before American, there was British dominance. I am not old enough to
remember the isles’ political dominance, but as a literature student, I
could not escape its cultural dominance. My first realization that books
can be bad too was when I was formally introduced to British literature.
Among the big injustices of colonialism has to be the veneration of
mediocre aristocratic writers and “thinkers".

By the 1990s, the American hold over contemporary culture was complete,
but abstract things were still influenced by the British, like the moral
supremacy of secularism, and the unhinged idea of socialism, and the
intellectual inferiority of nationalism. Liberation from British
cultural torture freed the thinking of a new generation of influential
Indians. That indeed is what it took for many Indians to understand
there was more than one right ideology, more than one right way for a
nation to be, and that many virtuous ‘isms’ were merely thought
experiments.

The decline of a global cultural force clears the minds of locals. And
the decline of America may free Indians from overestimating American
things at the cost of all that is Indian. But American colonialism does
not derive most of its power from overrated antics. Rather, its power
comes from truly exquisite creations. Like the way they make tech and
films and TV series and music. Even journalism. This need not be a good
thing, because they are inadvertent tools of co-option. Upscale Indians
try to imitate all that is good and American, and it just does not work
so well here.

Take one of America’s powerful exports: modern activism. The singular
evangelical idea of what is moral and that you can torment an elected
government that does not agree with you through anarchy is not dangerous
for US activists because its human rights movement is legally empowered.
In India, given our grey zones of law, it is not the same. Blind
imitation of American activism, thus, could easily ruin the lives of
idealistic youngsters. Think of what happened to fans of democracy in
Hong Kong.

A decline of America will also reduce the migration of Indians to that
nation. I am not concerned about the comically-conceited idea of “brain
drain". In fact, the movement of the privileged has given opportunities
to those from more modest families here. But if no Indian ever wants to
flee India, that will increase their stake in the country. When we know
we cannot flee, we stop mouthing grand philosophies and ideologies about
nationhood, and instead do banal things like cleaning the air and water
and the roads.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, and a novelist, most recently of ‘Miss
Laila, Armed And Dangerous’*
