# Modi is right: College degrees are overrated

*2022-07-10*

We know that Indians have immense stamina for useless issues. But we may
not have realized that it can often drown even the voice of Prime
Minister Narendra Modi. This, when what he said was sensational. On
Thursday in Varanasi he gave a speech to educators who had assembled to
discuss the implementation of the National Educational Policy. He said
that modern India’s education system “emerged from slavery". And that
it’s objective was petty. “The British, in their self-interest, set up a
system of education that was meant to incubate a servant class." He said
very little has changed since the colonizers left. And that it was time
India created more useful people than “degree-holders".

Not having a college degree has been a stigma in India. As a result,
many have faked their degrees even when they do not require such
certificates in their lines of work. Modi himself has been accused of
this. More amusing than politicians faking their degrees is the
imagination of graduates that people who did not go to college should
not hold important positions. As though being a graduate is an
achievement, or proof of intellect or anything meaningful. Isn’t it the
easiest thing to be if someone else is paying for it—to become a
graduate? But the quest for college degrees is such a sacred Indian
practice that politicians usually don’t scoff at it. Certainly a prime
minister taking it down is unprecedented.

But is it true that India’s present education system emerged from a
diabolic British plan to convert India’s brightest into unthinking
clerks? Many Indians believe that Jawaharlal Nehru was the one who began
the process of taming the middle-class by creating rewards for procuring
certificates of higher education. But he himself may have been co-opted
by the British in this sphere, just as he was by socialism and other
religions of his time.

When I was reading, The Man Who knew Infinity, a biography of the
mathematician Ramanujan by Robert Kanigel, I came across a piece of
historical record, a comment by a British bureaucrat that gave a peep
into how the British planned to control Indians. It was so dramatic that
it sounded like one of those periodical hoaxes that patriots circulate
on social media. But it was not a hoax. It was an authentic extract from
a Report on Canara, Malabar and Ceded Districts by a British bureaucrat
called William Thackeray (not the famous writer) in 1807: “It is very
proper that in England, a good share of the produce of the earth should
be appropriated to support certain families in affluence, to produce
senators, sages and heroes... The leisure, independence and high ideals
which the enjoyment of this rent affords has enabled them to raise
Britain to pinnacles of glory. Long may they enjoy it. But in India that
haughty spirit, independence and deep thought which the possession of
great wealth sometimes gives ought to be suppressed. They are directly
averse to our power and interest. The nature of things, the past
experience of all governments, renders it unnecessary to enlarge on this
subject. We do not want generals, statesmen and legislators; we want
industrious husbandmen."

As I am a Malayalee and have a cultural obligation to advertise what
some colonizers thought of us, at least then, I am delighted to point
out that Thackeray also says in the letter, “If we wanted restless and
ambitious spirits there are enough of them in Malabar to supply the
whole peninsula."

The diabolic hope succeeded. The British suppressed “that haughty
spirit" and created “industrious husbandmen". This resulted in a
Nehruvian elite and later a middle-class with that peculiar
character—unremarkable group thinkers fearful of entrepreneurship. Not
long ago, the forces that contributed to this were celebrated as
Nehruvian virtues: an obsession with studies, not to be knowledgeable,
but to find a job in an office. Nehru invested India’s meagre resources
in higher education for the elite instead of universal primary
education. This was his underrated flaw, write Jean Drèze and Amartya
Sen in An Uncertain Glory.

The poor, who wish to make something of the lives of their children, are
sucked into the powerful idea of education because they tend to imitate
the rich, who encourage them through the careful use of compliments,
reassured that education will only herd the poor into a hutch where the
rich hold all the cards.

This is what creates that occasional ‘beautiful Indian story’—a poor man
struggles all his life and spends all his money on the education of his
daughter, who studies under the streetlight and then finally gets a
degree. I used to know many children like this, on their way to degrees.
Most of them struggled with what was called “academics". As a result,
they went through their childhoods being called stupid. They may even
have believed it, even though they were probably very smart.

Modi’s pronouncement is significant in the context of his speech: a new
education policy that will bring fields like carpentry, machine repair
and plumbing into mainstream schooling for students who are interested
in these activities. Also, one of the proposals is that college students
will have the option to leave studies midway for a job and return to
resume their hunt for a degree. This is humane, given that most Indians
get a bad start in life and need to take care of themselves before they
can educate themselves.

I wish this had happened decades ago. There were so many superb
mechanics and athletes and artists who were made to feel dumb because
they couldn’t quite understand a rhombus. Millions of childhoods, spent
in pain, and wasted, because some people had a semi-literate idea of
education.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
