# Free speech warriors need freedom-from dud petitions

*2022-08-07*

The letter is addressed to Droupadi Murmu, who was sworn in as President
of India in July, with the blessings of the ruling Bharatiya Janata
Party (BJP), the very organisation the petition condemns. The petition
asks President Murmu “to immediately release all wrongfully imprisoned
writers and speak out forcefully to protect freedom of expression."

To the request from PEN for my signature, I have written the following
response:

Dear Liesl Gerntholtz,

I like PEN America, partly because they gave me an award once. However,
I will not be signing your petition. Signing petitions is among the most
useless things writers can do; far more useless than writing prologues
and forewords. And, outside the West, this petition business is so silly
that politicians find it more amusing than menacing.

Also, you should not give writers a facile option to mark themselves as
good people, where they have to just sign a noble letter. By denying
them the farce, the world would put pressure on them to do something
meaningful instead.

I did not find anything wrong with the substance of the petition. It is
true that the Indian government is using disproportionate force to quell
dissent. Yet, I found it annoying. But then some reasonable things are
annoying, like when a school teacher tells you how to raise your kids,
or a gender studies professor tries to reform men. You may think what I
am trying to say is that I found your mail sanctimonious. I did, but I
am not against a bit of sanctimony in this world. How else can anyone
say the right thing? The reason why your mail was annoying is that of
late many of us in India have come to identify that pious Western tone
with people whose humane views are a compensation for the ordinary evil
inside them.

The American liberal establishment, from where many petitions to the
developing world arise, is not exactly a standard-bearer of free speech.
Most of you get offended easily. But then taking offence, like
hypocrisy, is a fundamental right. It is what we do after taking offence
that defines our class. And liberal intellectuals do destroy the careers
of those who offended them. But then your point is that at least they
don’t or can’t jail, maim or kill their foes. Governments can. In that
light I grant that thin-skinned governments are far more dangerous than
thin-skinned intellectuals. But then you try to solve a problem posed by
thugs with solutions that work on intellectuals. Petition-signing, for
instance.

Among the activists whom India has jailed or harassed, there are three
kinds. The innocent; those who are in the grey area; and those who may
have actually done something unlawful. Most of them have been incited,
one way or the other, by American activism but they are not protected by
American law or the heft of its extraordinary human rights edifice.

**You might also like**

Does RBI policy need the attention it gets?

Pelosi’s Taiwan visit presents an opportunity for India

How is tax calculated on sale of apartment?

India’s oldest wealth portal grew 7 times in two years

This is the structure of global activism: sitting in safe havens,
Western activists incite people in other regions to seek the joy of
revolt. Developing countries jail activists, and their handlers can’t
liberate them. Years pass. Petitions are signed and sent to heads of
state.

Freedom of expression is a marvellous invention. But Indians never had
it for as long as I can remember. Many recent petitions make it look as
though the BJP has brought an end to a free society. But we were never
free. It is just that the harassment is more organized, orderly and
certain today. It may appear that the Indian news media has considerable
political liberty and that this freedom emerges from some Nehruvian
imitation of Western ideals. It is a misconception. India’s media
freedom emerged from a very practical and chaotic source— reporting of
political campaigns. As politicians condemned each other, and the media
quoted them, it appeared that journalism could take on the powerful.

Across the world, all sorts of freedom arose this way, through
collective self-interest. For instance, America was able to abolish
slave trade not only because it was the moral thing to do, but also
because it made business sense for one camp to destroy the unfair
business advantage (of cheap labour) of the other camp.

It is possible that political self-interest can bring American-grade
freedom of expression to India one day. As the government becomes more
and more authoritarian, I see our political parties, which are numerous
and diverse, consolidate into a moral bloc and formalize freedom of
expression—what an Indian citizen can do and cannot do, and what exactly
constitutes war against the state. Already, the BJP’s overuse of a
“sedition" law may have triggered the abolition of that obsolete piece
of legislation.

But, before all that happens, if I am jailed by my government, I
encourage you to get me the best lawyers, sabotage some Indian
investments in America, and raise hell, as you did against Russia. Just
don’t send out dud petitions.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

In Opinion, Mythili Bhusnurmath says MPC is out on a wing and a prayer.
Long Story has a cheeky take on the jargon of stock market.
