# The extraordinary human rights of animals in India

*2022-05-29*

I can see it on their smug faces. Across Gurugram, cows sense a bright
future. They stand on various roads looking in one direction, like
before, but there are more of them than ever and they are left like this
for hours by their minders because nobody now dares to evict cows; it’s
not like they are mere slum dwellers. So they amble about, blocking
traffic, occasionally nudging a biker and sending him rolling. Stray
dogs, too, are enjoying a good life, especially after a high court
clarified that they have “a right to be fed in their territory”.

For animals, India is like an advanced nation. In the West, humans talk
a lot about animal welfare, but there are very few free animals. Stray
dogs and cattle do not appear to have a right to life. Europe, in
particular, is a complete triumph of the Biblical man. All animals are
subordinate to humans, and those who cannot be subjugated have long been
terminated, whole dangerous majestic species wiped out to make the world
a safer place for humans. As an Indian, what I find most entertaining
about Europe is that I can walk for days into a cute thing called the
‘woods’ and emerge alive. This is more difficult in the US but not
improbable. It would be eventless in New Zealand where there are no
snakes even.

The West talks a lot about the welfare of animals; in fact, all talk
about animal welfare in India by posh people is derived from Western
sermons, but it is a post-apocalypse time in the West for the animal
world.

In India, a lone human may not last a day in a jungle. The animal
habitat is an unambiguous space. But the human habitat is an ambiguous
space that is shared by humans and animals. The law and its practice in
this regard are ambiguous too. In a city, is my right of way superior to
the right of a stray cow or dog? I do not know. I only know that lovers
and hawkers can be removed from the streets.

Animals in India appear to have extraordinary human rights. But this
emerges not from our romance with nature, because modern Indians are the
worst thing that can happen to nature. It does not emerge from any
modern sophistication, ancient moral code or tradition either. The
reason animals thrive in India is a combination of administrative
incompetence, allergy to order, the familiarity of informality and the
success of secular Western evangelism of animal rights that has
influenced us to adopt animal welfare laws that are the world’s most
sophisticated. The interaction between Indians and animals is usually
unsophisticated. It has a quality of antiquity. The antiquity is in the
absence of over-articulation of what animals mean to us.

The average Indian does not think much about the place of animals. He
has not formalized what animals mean to him; he has barely formalized
what a road lane or traffic signal means. Some animals are sacred and
useful, some are dangerous and rare, some tasty; and many are underdogs,
and hence endearing. We have no particular interest in the welfare of
animals, even if some of them are sacred. Sacred beings are not assured
of a good life in India. Let us not forget that women are worshipped
too.

A few days ago, a leopard killed a woman in Uttarakhand. It was captured
and caged by forest officials. When local villagers got to know of this,
they burnt the leopard in its cage, in vengeance. Those who did this
face severe legal consequences. This event captures many aspects of
Indian life: a certain banal reality in an ancient nation filled with
wild beasts; the fury of a mob whose ways are as ancient as the
leopard’s; and the intervention of a modern law—for the leopard.

Many of India’s troubles arise from the fact that it imports foreign
solutions for unique problems. Influenced by societies that have not
seen a leopard in centuries, or probably ever, we assume that a leopard
belongs in a forest. This is convenient for everyone; also, this is how
a society operates that demarcates human and animal habitats. We should
know better. A natural habitat is an ambiguous thing. It is wherever
there is easy food. What the leopard has been trying to say is that it
likes human settlements. There is a lot of slow easy prey here. But
forest officials have been “rescuing” leopards and banishing them to the
forest. And these cats have been finding their way back. There are
leopards in the sugarcane districts of Maharashtra that have probably
never seen a forest. They like it here, so what can we do?

My own relationship with animals has changed with my circumstances. I
have generally been friends with stray dogs, except when on a bike, or
running at dawn. After the Bhuj earthquake, when whole villages
collapsed, stray dogs grew very aggressive after feeding on human
corpses under rubble.

Stray dogs in cities are mostly docile, but they are dangerous to
unattended children, especially the poor whose ‘natural habitat’ is the
streets. Many kids have been mauled or eaten, and thousands bitten. In
Bionotes, a journal, Ryan Lobo and Meghna Uniyal write that India
records over 20,000 deaths annually from rabies and the actual number
could be many times more. They argue that Western activists whose
notions of animal welfare have been rejected in their own nations see
India as fertile ground for some extreme ideas. As a result, they say,
animal welfare in India is at the expense of human safety, especially of
the poor.

Animal welfare in India is also shaped by something very Indian. At a
fundamental level, we are not as morally certain as Christian dominated
civilizations that humans are more equal than animals. As you can see,
on the question of how to keep Indians safe from animals, this column
itself is ambiguous.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
