# India is not as interesting to the world as we may think

*2022-05-15*

Many Indians feel they are stuck with Indians, that they are so good
they “belong in the first world". That what they do is export quality,
but they have not been lucky enough to draw the attention of the world.
There are Indian entrepreneurs, writers, artists, academics and
activists who feel they would be recognized only in “the West". As a
result, many things that Indians do is for international recognition.
Prestige is something that comes from outside India. But the fact is
that the world is not as interested in India as Indians imagine.

No one is curious about us anymore, or has much respect for us, or is
fond of us in any special way. Few find us interesting. In general, the
world does not care about us. We are on nobody’s radar. We are neither
cool nor hot. The world wishes to learn nothing from us. In the
perception of the ordinary folks, India is not so important. I was
reminded of this when I visited France and Germany in April. But this is
not an opinion born out of recent travel alone, though by ‘world’ I mean
the ‘West’, and I know you, too, do. It is not that we don’t matter; it
is just that we have become a boring middling region.

The history of the world’s interest in India is probably long. Once we
were rich, then esoteric, as charlatans promoted exotic ideas about us.
As the West prospered, some of its rich found relief from their
anxieties in a quest for meaning, which they thought was hidden
somewhere in India. Later, in the modern world, I was a witness to how
excited and fearful the world was about our seemingly inexhaustible
cheap labour in technology. Around this time, hope arose for a new West
in democratic India. The hope was that we would become a huge market for
Western goods, like China, but nicer, more docile and comprehensible
than China. All that hope and interest has gone. Today, we are not too
rich or too poor; we have not done badly, our poor are not as
heartbreaking as Africa’s. We are beyond condescension, but neither
equals nor rivals of the West. As a story, we are dull.

The only thing that makes India interesting to ordinary people in the
West are the country’s supposed flaws—the popularity of Narendra Modi,
his long confusing hugs of other world leaders, his refusal to condemn
Russia in return for cheap oil, and the perception that Muslims in India
are persecuted.

Modi’s public image in the West appears poor. He is not yet demonized as
Vladimir Putin was long before he attacked Ukraine, but that may only be
because India is not so relevant to them. Modi’s image there may not
worsen, but is unlikely to improve because the moral compass of the West
requires villains. Even Aung San Suu Kyi has been cancelled after she
stopped talking like a righteous school girl and developed the
complexities of a practical politician of a difficult nation. Modi’s
image will not be rescued by Western conservatives because there is no
such thing as a global right-wing. The right, everywhere, is local, and
when it comes to foreign issues where the stakes are low, they exhibit
the same righteous indignation as liberals.

This is different from how ordinary people in the West view Chinese
President Xi Jinping. He is not a mere strongman who is framed by
China’s atrocities. His image in the West is more complex than that of
Modi; Xi is seen as a man in control of one of the most influential
regions in the world. Everyone is interested in what he has to say, what
China has to say.

It is odd that I must be reminded of the irrelevance of India on a trip
to Paris for a book fair where India was “the guest of honour". The
French embassy of India took me there to talk to the French. I even have
a publisher in France who has translated all my novels. Isn’t this
interest? Most Indian readers may not have read a single French author,
not even Camus. But then, the fact is my French publisher has lost money
betting on me. Not many Indian novels are translated into French and
most of them sell only a few hundred copies.

There were large crowds of book-lovers at the book fair who were mostly
interested in their own nation, Europe, the rest of the West, and maybe
Africa, which has returned as the new flavour. I don’t think anyone even
knew India was “the guest of honour". India drew attention when some
Indian dancers hammed a folk dance. These days when I hear ‘mast
qalandar’ in a global setting, I know some Indians are selling ‘the
world’ lemons.

Now and then, the West does reward an Indian writer or activist, but
even that is evidence of their self-absorption because the subject of
their appreciation is usually someone who talks like them, writes like
them, has the same values as them, or is fighting a battle they have
sponsored in complex ways.

Our interest in the West, too, is waning, but it is still high. We
absorb Western culture, values, truths and half-truths, and many of us
choose to live in a world where Westerners hold all the cards. We know
what not caring about a region means because we don’t care for most of
the world. We find it hard to accept that we are as peripheral to the
West as Africa is to us.

In the global exchange of interest, there is a big deficit. It is time
to stop denying that. If a wide spectrum of creators across industries
realize that India is all they have and they learn to respect the
domestic market more, and accept that all foreign contracts are only a
matter of lottery, maybe they would do things differently. But we should
continue to tell the India story to the West. Just that we have to first
figure out how to tell a story that nobody really cares about.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’ *
