# Why there is something wrong with the Indian buffet

*2022-06-13*

If you want to make Indians laugh, show them what Europeans call a
“buffet". Even in a luxury hotel, the spread is so small it would fit
into an Indian’s glance, which by nature is sweeping. At one cunning
Parisian hotel, the buffet plate was the width of my palm, probably to
discourage guests from piling on too many things. On the other hand, in
most of Asia, especially India, the five-star buffet is designed to
convey that the hotel made a loss on it. The buffet is such a sprawl of
dishes that one has to first circumnavigate the entire spread just to
get the lay of the land. Still, there would be surprises, nooks from
where food emerges and some things that are not displayed but can be
requested or extorted.

There is something very wrong with the Indian buffet. To understand why
this is so, meander with me a bit, as though we are at a vast buffet of
Indian maladies.

The Indian buffet is primarily a spectacle. The food also is, but mostly
the people, especially as they fill their plates—some of them in their
pyjamas. They feel at home; they are eating at the same address where
they sleep, and they pay to sleep here, and that must be a definition of
home. So they appear in clothes they would otherwise never wear if they
were going to be in the line of vision of a hundred odd strangers. Maybe
they wear pyjamas because they wish their bellies to be unencumbered
during this limitless meal.

There is so much to choose from in an Indian buffet that people are able
to fill their plates according to their mental states. The plates of
large people are usually filled with fruits, which is usually their
first course when in public. They are also happy to display a plate of
fruits, unlike the later trips to the spread that are usually more
discreet. But mostly people fill their plates with bread and sugar,
because most people are honest in their preferences most of the time.

The whole buffet scene is like a rave party, with distressed waiters
dealing in sugar and maida; and addicts of these two sources of
nourishment wanting more and more, shouting for the attention of the
dealers, asking why something is taking so long, how long must they
wait; how long must their poor starving children wait before the next
fix. These anxious food addicts are aware that waiters here, unlike in
the West, are too powerless to ever tell them, “It’s a buffet, go and
take it yourself." Surveying all this is the sanctimonious guy on a
low-carb diet, for whom there is nothing much in the spread, but he
consoles himself by saying that man does not need much.

The buffet is an overt exhortation to eat as much as you can, which
means consume more than you need to. Everything about food and feeding
is about excess and space.

Even a modest buffet, like what is offered on a Hindi film set, requires
a back-end supply system that occupies considerable space, and it is not
merely physical space. I have always associated Indian film sets with
eating. The place reeks of food and the remains of food. One of the
first vehicles that comes onto the location is the caterer’s van. And
the most gloomy part of a set are those uneven cheap aluminium tables
with shrouds of white cloth on them, apart from the unhappy men who make
elaborate but vacuous food items and pour them into massive vats.

In an important way, the Indian buffet, especially at a five-star
resort, is similar to Indian democracy. Every major region is
represented and there is a sense that there is something for everyone.
To be precise, everyone with a substantive voice, that is. The buffet
reflects its own tyranny of the majority. The minority which is very fit
is not represented, and even the few things that the superfit get to eat
are there because some famous foods are, somehow, by some miracle,
healthy.

At the end of it, much of the Indian buffet ends up wasted. Some people
tell me that about half the food in a typical buffet goes waste. This
horrifies most Indians, including those given to saying they would never
forgive a five-star hotel for not having a buffet breakfast. But then, I
have never fully grasped the horror in wastage. As in, I do not know why
wastage is a such bad thing. What is the difference if a kilo of biryani
is eaten by some guy who does not need so much food, or wasted as
uneaten food on his plate, or left in a vat on a buffet spread to be
thrown away? The food has been paid for at every stage, and if leftovers
are eventually given away to animals and microbes, whose existence
completes a complex ecosystem, what is so tragic about this? The
planet’s crisis of carbon emission and fresh-water depletion does not
become any more bearable because a guy sits and eats his entire serving
of biryani.

Still, there is a certain vulgarity in excess and wastage, especially in
a poor country.

Consider a massive Indian five-star buffet from the point of view of a
new waiter who has arrived from a distant impoverished village. After he
recovers from the discovery that a single meal in the hotel costs about
half his monthly salary perhaps, imagine what goes through his head when
he sees people taking heaps of delicious things and leaving them all
behind, or when the hotel throws away hundreds of kilos of perfectly
edible food. It is vulgar.

Often, vulgarity itself has no consequence for us. But it is hard to
deny that vulgarity is a way of disrespecting the unlucky. Some hotels
say they have a system of giving away excess food to the poor, but I do
not fully buy this. Even if this is true, it is still vulgar to send
decaying food to the poor.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
