# How nasty quarrels could seed good public behaviour

*2022-12-25*

Indians are among the worst people to fly. Nicer Indians have been
hoping to reform them, but reformation is generally useless. Good public
behaviour is not about character; it is about pretending to be good
because the other option will have bad consequences. But, daily, in
airports, cafes and malls and offices, India trains Indians to believe
that bad behaviour is safe, even advantageous. Also, a sign of
authority.

**You might also like **

Market needs a Santa rally as Dec sees 32-yr low returns

Need credible fiscal consolidation path: Bibek Debroy

Where is the PSU stocks rally headed?

Trends that defined India’s stock markets this year

A cultural circumstance of Indians is that they show respect by
appearing servile and that elicits an animal instinct from whom they
serve. How much bad behaviour we tolerate at the very first instance is
how we train people to treat us. And Indians in the service industry
have been training not only Indians, but the whole world to treat them
poorly. The long rope they give and their hamming of servility when they
only mean to convey respect, makes even people from the West forget
their manners a week after they land in India.

This was why the flight crew of Air India behaved in infamous ways,
especially on the Gulf and East Asian sectors that often served
passengers who were not very sophisticated. Once on an Air India flight,
when the carrier was still owned by the government, a man complained
about the food and the flight attendant told him, “Sir, next time you
fly Jet." True, such swag also emerges from the fearsome job security
that a government employee has, but I am confident that she was also
consciously training the guy and his like-minded peers to behave
themselves.

If Indians know that they cannot get away with bad behaviour, they
always consider the option of good behaviour, something that most
Indians experiment with when the crew is not Indian but Caucasian. White
people seem to terrify them. Video clips of Indian flight attendants
showing a low threshold for poor behaviour would thus further persuade
Indians to be nice to fellow Indians as well.

Even so, I do not want flight attendants to have such a resounding
victory that they transform into the self-important and fierce cabin
crew on American airlines. But then, no human system achieves social
equilibrium; life swings between unfairness and excessive worker
assertion; between how Indians behave with flight attendants and how
American flight attendants may treat an Indian who has asked for a third
glass of water. Maybe the closest we can come to social justice is when
people who feel strong and assured of their social status concede some
poor behaviours by people who serve them.

A few years ago in London, I was in a bus that had several Indian
cricket legends, including Vinod Kambli and Kapil Dev. Kambli was
standing in the aisle and narrating an anecdote to someone, his hands
flailing. The bus driver snapped at Kambli, telling him that he was
distracting him and that he should sit down. The bus was not moving; it
was stationary in a parking lot. The driver probably did not know
Kambli, but he knew he was an Indian cricketer, and that so was the
person listening to Kambli’s story, and that the bus had several Indian
cricketers. It would be lazy to call the driver a ‘racist’; it is almost
always lazy to call anyone that. He was just a man who felt something
and had complete social freedom to voice it. I think he would have said
that to an English cricketer, too, someone who may have been trained by
many rude drivers never to stand in the aisle of a bus and talk aloud.
Kambli was embarrassed and hurt. He had no choice but to quietly sit
down. It was a moment of social justice perhaps. The funny thing about
social justice is that it is not what people imagine; often, it is not
pretty.

Sometimes, there are practical reasons why Indians behave poorly. For
instance, bad behaviour works. I was on an Air India plane that was on
the tarmac for four hours at the peak of summer with its
air-conditioning off. It was a bunch of unruly passengers who forced the
airline to open the cabin doors. (These days when an airline announces
abruptly that unruly passengers would be prosecuted, I know that the
flight is going to be delayed or cancelled.)

In my previous column, I argued that India keeps Indians “in a state of
childhood", and as a result, Indian adults behave like children. This is
also why Indians have so many demands the moment they realize that
someone is paid to serve them. Poor behaviour is not just rude
behaviour, but also having unfair expectations, like the number of times
you want a waiter or flight attendant to come and take orders. Also, in
all the offices I have worked, it was common for sahibs to ask a peon to
bring them a glass of water. I’ve never worked anywhere where I didn’t
hear “*paani pilao*", which is still a deep auditory memory of an Indian
office. People who fetch their own water are very different from people
who want it brought to them.

Office peons themselves are not averse to being ordered around for tasks
that should not require another human. In fact, they get a bit concerned
if you tell them that the sahibs should be independent enough to fetch a
glass of water themselves, because the job security of the poor comes
from the childish condition of their masters.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Chandrajit Banerjee tells how the budget can enhance our*
*ease of doing business globally. Sarah Green Carmichael says* *workers
aren’t quietly quitting* *but optimizing time. Long Story probes why the
RBI finds it* *tough to tame inflation.*
