# Four major national flaws that unite Indian citizens

*2022-05-22*

Many of us have wondered, on days we were underemployed, what unites
India. For some reason, when people want to understand what unites a
society, they think the reasons have to be virtuous or beautiful. As a
result, we have been given spurious reasons for what binds us
together—like Hindi cinema, cricket, English and democracy. In reality,
what often unites people are their vices.

Here is a list of India’s national flaws.

**1) The Indian family is a cartel:** When your nation is richer than
your family, you can rebel against your family and claim independence.
But when your family is rich and your nation poor, you assume “family
values" and conform to traditions. The importance of the Indian family,
from what I have seen first-hand in Madras, Kerala, Mumbai and Delhi, is
that when the country is undependable, only the family can give you an
unfair advantage over others. It is the power of the family that has
created a certain meekness among India’s elite, especially its men. It’s
a quality that defines the country’s upper classes. Across the nation
and a vast swathe of time, women in urban India have lamented that
Indian men are eager boyfriends, but when it comes to marriage, they go
with their mother’s pick. If Indian women dated poor men, they may not
face this. The richer the boyfriend, the more difficult his parents.

**2) The reason that India is safest for the rich:** There is something
odd about how safe India is for its middle classes and rich. Street
mugging is nearly unheard of, deaths from violent crime for money are
rare. This could be because the well-off in India, do not walk enough on
the streets to be mugged. We minimize the time we have to spend in a
public space, and we generally fear the worst, so take precautions. But
there is another reason why India is safe: the informal suspension of
human rights in police stations and the general cruelty of the justice
system.

For most criminals in India, getting caught by the police is an
extremely expensive development. This is true across regions. Until
recently, Kerala, despite its reputation for communist-grade healthcare
and education, had a very cruel police force. There is probably no part
of India where the police are not feared by common people. What the
police and justice system cannot achieve through competence, they
achieve in informal ways.

**3) Indians are misers:** Before the advent of taxi-hailing apps and
cheap rides in white cars, people had a foe in the auto-rickshaw guy.
One of the most irritating things about Indian life was this guy asking
for “something over the metre". But then, we should have thought of the
matter in a different way. Travel in India is cheap; it is probably
underpriced. Many prices are pegged to affordability by the poor. As a
result, the poor actually subsidize our lives. So, the auto guy asking
for more money is only a request to not be fleeced by those of us who
can afford to pay. Ideally, we should be leaking money. Instead of
arguing with the auto guy, we should be stuffing notes in his pocket.
But then, we are a miserly society. Most of what Indians hail as
austerity and “price consciousness" is merely a form of small-mindedness
born out of long years of insecurity. Our corporations, too, are stingy.
They do not have the heart to invest in research and development. That
is a reason why industrialists tend to overrate that nonsensical Indian
phenomenon called ‘jugaad’, which is a cheap and eventually expensive
way of doing something by bending rules. Also, our rich give away very
little in organized charity; they are more likely to donate money to
God.

**4) Everyone thinks he is Chanakya:** Not many in India have read the
Arthashastra, but almost everyone knows or thinks he knows a synopsis of
this ancient treatise. In the national imagination, its author Chanakya
is a cunning practical man. No one wants his frugal diet; but many are
eager to adopt his rumoured practicality, his “statecraft", which is
usually a melodramatic justification for doing some nasty things. To
follow a man and not follow his diet is to completely misunderstand him.

We speak a lot about morality, bloviate on spirituality as though we are
all very divine, but in practice, at any given point in time, there is
probably a subconscious national feeling in all of us that there are
advantages in twisting rules.

This is why we do not have any order when we drive or plan cities. Chaos
comforts us as something innately human. As a consequence, Indians are
among those who have the poorest quality of life. There is not a single
city that promises natural beauty, clean air, ease of travel or easy
access to outdoor activities. I know captive animals in Europe that live
better than most Indian millionaires.

Yet, most of our protests are about esoteric matters that will not
transform our lives. That is another thing which unites Indians—the
stamina for useless issues.

India’s national flaws are not always grand. There are smaller things
that affect all of us as much. I wish to particularly defame the fact
that across India, people invite you to dinner but will not serve food
until very late in the night; also, everywhere in the country, if there
are two gates, one will be kept shut because of a national belief that
if some hardship is imposed on people, some good comes out of it. Also,
you know you are in India when a cop and a culprit walk hand-in-hand to
court. And, during every political rally, anywhere in our country, when
a guy is giving a speech, his side-kick will come and whisper something
in his ear as though it can’t wait.

There is much that unites us. We have been looking in all the wrong
places.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
