# What will finally save us from toxic air isn’t democracy

*2022-11-06*

It is that time of the year when toxic smog makes it hard to see the
faces of the rich and sophisticated in the national capital region, but
I can assure you they look like losers for having to live here. Every
November, they reconsider buying that Maltese citizenship, or that villa
in Goa for the same price; and they secretly or overtly despise their
spouses who are stuck here for emotional or professional reasons. Of the
millions of rupees they pay every year to live in Delhi, on their home
in a fortified enclave, the school of their children, their club, their
cars and the restaurants they frequent, a major portion is not for the
quality of services, but simply to keep real India out. Yet, it is hard
to keep real India out of their citadels, especially when seasonal wind
patterns ensure that north India’s vehicular, industrial and
agricultural pollution does not blow away and instead fills the lungs of
hundreds of millions, damaging many in irreparable ways.

**You might also like**

Tweak in IBC to turn sick firms around faster

Adani plans retail bond sale worth <span class="webrupee">₹</span>2,000
crore 

What gives TVS an edge over Hero?

Titan sparkles, but stock remains pricey

Winter pollution has been bad the past few years except during the
pandemic reprieve when the air was fresh and crisp. India has been
unable to solve the problem because Indian politicians do not have an
incentive to provide clean air. In fact, every important aspect of
Indian politics contributes to the smog, including the Aam Aadmi Party,
which through its pampering of polluting farmers implies that its
promise was only “a clean government", not clean air. As a result, the
way to clean north India’s winter air lies outside the democratic
process. But how?

The smog in Delhi is caused by emissions from vehicles, industries and
the burning of paddy stubble by farmers in northern states, especially
Punjab. Farmers burn the stubble because it is the cheapest way to get
rid of it, even though it is the most harmful way. Last year, there was
much lament about air quality; committees were set up and the right
things were said by politicians and bureaucrats. Evidently, nothing has
worked. This year, stubble-burning in Punjab has increased. Farmers,
often regarded as sacred beings, especially among people who do not know
them, and who are often referred to as “the hands that feed us", have
successfully protested against government action against farm fires.
They are demanding compensation to adopt cleaner practices. Until then,
they will be the hands that choke us.

Devotees of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party have made it seem as if
stubble-burning is the only reason Delhi is choking. That is not true.
It is a joint effort of many aspects of Indian life.

A few years ago, Beijing faced a similar problem. It had become one of
the most polluted places on earth. The Chinese government has greatly
improved the air quality in Beijing, which is far cleaner than Delhi
today. How is it that a Chinese government that is called autocratic,
usually in a bad way, is more humane than the Indian government? It is
not just that Chinese methods are more efficient than Indian. It is that
political incompetence is protected by democracy. As long as politicians
can win elections, they need not actually do any good. And the central
premise of democracy, that people vote for ethical causes, has turned
out to be nonsense. Also, the average Indian voter does not care at all
about air quality. In this way, Indian democracy is the revenge of the
poor. Equality in India is not improving the lives of the poor, but
worsening the lives of the rich.

India is only an electoral democracy; otherwise, it is a plutocracy of
elected guys. A silver lining is that unlike corruption and anarchy,
politicians don’t stand to gain from pollution. So they do wish the
problem did not exist. Maybe some of them even have half a mind to solve
it. But they are too inept and callous to find effective solutions. They
know that elections in India are not decided by air quality. In any
case, it is a seasonal phenomenon, and Indians forget the smog the
moment it clears. Also, even the upper classes have low standards for
health. Poor air quality, whose consequences for life are not very
visible, unlike covid cremations, is certainly not worth antagonizing
voters like the oh-so-sacred farmers.

The solution to the toxic winter smog has to come from outside the
democratic process. This is not impossible. We often lament how bad our
governance is; but a more interesting question is why do good things
happen?

I can see three ways in which north India can solve winter pollution.
None of these requires the inconvenience of human goodness. Nor does it
require the practical mechanism of electoral democracy. But each of them
needs the cooperation of politicians.

One, the self-interest of old men. I have a theory that one of the
reasons why many nations enforced autocratic lockdowns during the
pandemic is that old men were at the greatest risk, and old men either
run most of the world or are influential in other ways. Pollution, too,
is most likely to kill the older lot first. As awareness around the long
effects of smog on weak lungs grows, the fellowship of old Indian
politicians may find the will to solve the problem.

Two, a farsighted influential politician who realizes that politicians
stand to make many times more money in a liveable prospering country
might get aggressive about improving living standards. This is funny
only because truth has that quality.

Three, the nationalism of shame. I am a big believer in this.
Historically, nationalism begins as pride, but eventually becomes more
sophisticated and real, and people who have high stakes in a region will
feel strongly ashamed of its flaws. Shame is a form of intelligence, and
I wish it upon us.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Nitin Pai tells how we should confront* *the global
'polycrisis'. Aditya Sinha and Chirag Dudani write* *how to make states
face consequences* *of their fiscal misadventures. Long Story exposes
the* *governance challenge at MCX.*

 
