# Does India keep people in an endless state of childhood?

*2022-12-11*

Our meeting did not take place on the appointed date, though I would
think of the subject. I have never thought so much about a theory that I
had, at first glance, dismissed as too esoteric. My intuitive reaction
was that modern Indians are not so naive, and that they only pretended
to be child-like. But then, had I misunderstood the premise? I reached
out to him to find out why he felt so and what examples he had. I wanted
to have an argument over a series of emails that I could write about.
But I got the feeling that he did not want to discuss the matter with me
anymore. But I did not stop thinking about it.

**You might also like **

Apple plans to push India up in its value chain

HCL Tech puts IT investors on edge

JSW Group dusts off electric vehicle plan

HUL’s bet on health & wellness needs time

Do Indian adults behave like children? And does India keep Indians in a
state of childhood? If you do not try to connect these two questions,
that is search for an answer that connects these two questions, then the
idea becomes more persuasive.

It is possible that all governments, to an extent, infantilize their
own, but there are some circumstances that are unique to India.

One of the triggers that made me take the subject seriously was when the
Reserve Bank of India decided to protect Indian credit card users from
auto-debits. As a result, a few weeks ago, most digital recurring
payments to merchants failed and a segment of our digital economy
collapsed. There was chaos for a few days. To reset such payments,
Indians had to perform of a set of tasks that seemed complicated and
tedious. The only happy people were a few Indians who were once fans of
The New York Times and now wished to cancel their subscription, which is
very difficult because you can’t just click a button for it; instead,
you have to call or chat online. But RBI, through a rule to guard
Indians who did not ask to be guarded, liberated thousands of NYT
subscribers.

Our central bank has traditionally worked under the assumption that we
are gullible. A digital transaction in India is full of friction,
requiring multi-factor okays. It is as though RBI thinks Indians are not
mature enough.

Many wings of the Indian government treat Indians in this manner. They
bully us in many ways, and there is a presumption visible in every
public policy—that we are not smart or mature. For instance, the legal
drinking age in two Indian states is 25, and in most it is 21. It is
ridiculous not because there is widespread drinking among adolescents
and people in their early twenties, but because it reveals how
governments see Indians in their early twenties as kids.

Is the Indian government right, though? Are Indians juvenile?

But then, if you don’t stretch the argument to absurdity, it is wrong to
infantilize even children. One of the big mistakes mainstream education
and entertainment industries do is in presuming, with vapid euphemisms,
that children are less intelligent version of adults. As a result they
are presumed to be frivolous, and addicts of entertainment. Also, there
is a presumption that they are “innocent" and should be protected from
sexual ideas and images of drugs and violence. All of this India does to
Indian adults, too.

There is a whole clutch of Western films that are rated “adult" for
theatrical release in India, but are still censored to protect adults
from the menace of sex. It is as though India believes that it has
created a vast nation of sexually starved people who will behave like
adolescents if they see sex.

It was only a few months ago that India finally acknowledged the 16+
category as people who are on the spectrum of adulthood, mature enough
to watch a bit of nudity. If you look at the age ratings of many global
films and series, you will notice that Indian authorities and parents
assume that their children are the least mature, who need to be
protected from “corrupting influences".

Indian spiritual gurus not only treat their followers as children, but
also clearly say they are. Not surprising then that some spiritual heads
are known as ‘mothers’. We can argue that all religions have that
condescending tone—that deems all ordinary people the children of a
sacred being. But in India, it is a degree more. Take, for instance,
this part of Rabindranath Tagore’s acceptance speech after he was
awarded the 1913 Nobel Prize in Literature: “Is not the East the mother
of spiritual humanity and does not the West... do not the children of
the West amidst their games and plays, when they get hurt, when they get
famished and hungry, turn their faces to that serene mother, the East?"

On their part, Indian adults do behave like children. For example,
consider how Indians behave on flights, especially international. A few
days ago, a German flight attendant told me how overworked she feels
when most passengers are Indian. Indians seem to have many demands. More
water, more food, more drinks. And they mess up the toilets, I am told.
And, some passengers go off to sleep on the floor and pretend to be in a
coma when flight attendants try to wake them.

There are, of course, aspects of life where the Indian government does
not treat its own as precious children. India does not protect us from
lethal dangers like road accidents, or ensure there are automatic doors
in all trains, or insist on fire safety in factories. India only
protects Indians from themselves.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist and the creator of the Netflix
series ‘Decoupled’ .*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Puja Mehra says* *‘Arjuna’s eye’* *hasn’t quite been on
inflation. Can* *ChatGPT* *ever produce an original work of physics or
philosophy? Sandipan Deb answers. Long Story tracks* *the outlier
tractor* *in rural India.*
