# Why ‘mindfulness’ and ‘zen masters’ make little sense

*2022-02-06*

A few days ago, when the second most famous monk in the world, Thích
Nhat Hanh, died, many famous people across the world celebrated him as
an evangelist of “mindfulness”, as though it really exists. They also
referred to him as a “zen master”, as though they know what it means.
They could not have, because no one knows what a zen master is, or what
a zen master does. The title is not like a karate black belt that you
attain after a set of accomplishments. ‘Zen master’ is Western nonsense
born out of an important source of nonsense —unhappy Caucasians
searching for the meaning of life and finding it in something that is
almost never pastel, and quaint enough for it to be exotic but not so
alien that it is incomprehensible. The legend of Nhat Hanh and the fame
of his “mindfulness” are products of this.

In Nhat Hanh’s words, “Mindfulness is to be aware of what is going on…
When you breathe in, and if you know that you are breathing in, that is
called mindfulness of breathing. When you drink your tea, and if you are
aware that you are drinking your tea, that is called mindfulness of
drinking.” And so on.

This is not nonsense. The immersive present is even pleasurable; just
that it cannot be a full-time job for anyone even in a monastery. In any
case, even if we assume that some people can actually always live in the
present, why is the fierce focus on a passing moment of banality so
exalted? So what if you learn to focus on the moment? Why is this
spiritual or philosophical or superior to being lost in thought, being
in the trance of a majestic idea, mulling our histories, or getting
excited about the future? Intellectually, some of the most joyous things
we do are never a marination in the present. Introspection, for
instance, is entirely about the past. And an observation is not the act
of seeing, as people claim; it is always the memory of seeing.

There is a perception that everything monks in maroon robes do is wise,
deep and peaceful, and everything that others do frivolous and leads to
anxiety. In fact, I think monks are probably deeply unhappy people; they
are fleeing some deep sorrow, or their mental states might be more
brooding than joyous. I do not think seekers like Nhat Hanh know more
than us—what we are, why we exist, and why there is something instead of
nothing. Everyone, including monks, are groping around in primordial
darkness.

Once, we had nothing to do and we studied every moment, like animals,
and it was boring. Modern life is the result of a deliberate and
desperate attempt of humans to escape the tedium of “mindfulness”. We
were reminded of this very recently when we were locked down in the
pandemic. We were stuck in a long present, without any movement towards
an illusory future. We fled it, inventing purpose and risking our lives.

Just because the joy of purpose is not permanent, we have allowed some
men in distinctive dresses to convince us that going back to a time when
all of life was monastic will lead us to happiness. The fact is that the
monastic pursuit of joy is as fleeting as the more material pursuits.
This is why our rural cousins who live amid breathtaking beauty want us
to find them big-city jobs, even if some Indian cities are perhaps the
ugliest places on earth. They have had enough being mindful of walking,
of waking, of milking cattle. They want pace and fun.

The existence of false paths to happiness and joy has damaged the lives
of millions of unhappy people who may have been better served if they
were not given false promises.

You may have heard of Nhat Hanh only after he died, but he was far more
influential than you realize. If you have heard of “living in the
present”, it has come to you largely because of Nhat Hanh, through a
complex route: He was born in a socially-influential family in Vietnam;
for reasons that are unclear, he decided to become a monk; he was a
political guy, and he soon antagonized older men; but as he had a social
headstart, he could use opportunities to go West, where people saw in
his ideas whatever they wished to see, as they did with Aung San Suu
Kyi’s. But then when she opted to be practical, she did not live up to
the Western ideal. Nhat Hanh did.

The problem with powerful people, even famous monks, is that they can be
dangerous. In the early 1960s, some Buddhist monks immolated themselves
as a part of what they claimed or thought was political protest. Decades
later, in a conversation with Oprah Winfrey, Nhat Hanh said, “It was not
suicide because in a difficult situation like in Vietnam, to make your
voice heard is difficult. So sometimes we had to burn ourselves alive in
order for our voice to be heard around…That is an act of love and not of
despair.”

How often we have seen this. Some people who need to be rescued from
depression kill themselves, and the articulate then explain a “cause”
that somehow aligns with their own political motives.

What if the truth is that the suicidal only fabricate grand reasons for
their final act? Those who gain from their death then make them into
heroes; and this heroism in turn attracts other suicidal people to
imitate not only the act of suicide, but also the method. It is probably
not a coincidence that in the past 13 years, over a hundred Tibetan
monks, too, chose the same method of political protest—they immolated
themselves.

When Thích Nhat Hanh was justifying the suicides of monks to Winfrey, I
wondered if he was being in the present. Or if he was mindful enough to
ask himself why some monks burn themselves for a cause, while some live
on till 95.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
