# Why we must adopt Ambedkar’s tactics in fighting foes

*2022-10-16*

In its first days, the anti-corruption movement was also a skit. The
set, which was a raised platform that had a thin white mattress, was
inspired by the freedom movement. The plot, too, of course, which was
that one man would go on an indefinite fast and big crowds would come to
watch. The leader of the movement, Anna Hazare, displayed some of the
mannerisms of Gandhi, like the thoughtful tilt of his head. His
lieutenants played their roles by crawling on to the stage to whisper
things in the leader’s ear, as major figures of the freedom movement did
to Gandhi. There was even a man on stage who looked dressed up like
Swami Vivekananda.

At times, ordinary Indian life, too, is a skit. People unknowingly
imitate actors from iconic cinema. In many video clips, drunk Indians,
including upper-class women, who are threatening cops or security guards
are actually hamming film scenes. Indians not only pantomime but also
borrow the morals of historical figures and film classics. Gandhi’s
technique of protesting authority, for instance, and his glorification
of austerity have seeped into Indian life. But in the giant skit of
modern Indian life, there is a historical figure who does not feature
enough—B.R. Ambedkar. He is rarely imitated and his techniques of
fighting stronger foes are almost never used by Indians.

It is true that his fame has grown since his death because the power of
upper castes in deciding whom Indians should adore has receded. In fact,
this month, yet another book about him was released. In Ambedkar: A Life
author Shashi Tharoor points out that today only Gandhi statues
outnumber those of Ambedkar. “A measure of his stature is that his and
Gandhi’s are the only two statues on the grounds in front of
Parliament." But modern India’s tribute to Ambedkar is more decorum,
perhaps even an apology to the way India tormented him throughout his
life. No one thinks of Ambedkar in terms of life hacks, but his story is
full of them. And we have squandered them all these years by merely
worshipping him.

His most important method of fighting, an umbrella strategy that
accommodates other techniques, is this: in a fight against a formidable
foe, align with another formidable force. Then promote your ally as the
future, improved version of your foe.

The Hindu religion made Ambedkar “an untouchable", an expression that he
used freely to describe himself, though modern upper-caste people tend
to display a certain proxy-sensitivity to the term. Ambedkar did not
just relinquish the Hindu religion, he aligned with an equally
formidable force—Hindu culture. He made a show of considering a
conversion to Christianity, Islam or Sikhism and then rejecting them
because he was not convinced they were any better than the Hindu
religion. In the end, the leader chose Buddhism because it was Hinduism
without all its wounds. “Buddhism was," Tharoor writes, “a kind of Hindu
Protestantism."

In other spheres, too, Ambedkar used the strategy of countering foes
with formidable but modern forces. He countered Hindu practices by
invoking the finest insights of the West. To him, Westernisation was not
a form of subjugation to a dominant culture, but a way of punishing
ancient India. Also, he countered the political clout of north Indians
and Hindi by pushing for English as the single language that can unite
the whole nation. For the same reason, he also overrated south India:
“There is a vast difference between the North and the South. The North
is conservative. The South is progressive. The North is superstitious,
the South is rational. The South is educationally forward, the North is
educationally backward. The culture of the South is modern. The culture
of the North is ancient."

Maybe he did not know enough about the South, but this view suited him
in neutralizing the power of his political rivals.

He took on Gandhi. We are often told they had “ideological differences",
which is another way of saying nothing. Historians can be lame
transmitters of human psychology. It seems more probable that Ambedkar’s
disenchantment with Gandhi had something to do with a turf battle.
Gandhi, an upper-caste male, was India’s most influential social
reformer but he had endured none of the indignities of being “an
untouchable". Imagine if the country’s most influential feminist were a
man. Whatever the reason for their friction, Ambedkar countered Gandhi
too by aligning with forces that were as formidable as Gandhi, but
futuristic. It was not a person, as no one else back then could match
Gandhi’s stature. So Ambedkar aligned with the great moral idea of the
modern city. He dismissed Gandhi’s romance of the village and the idea
that the unit of governance had to be the village. In fact, Ambedkar
said that the Indian village was the fountainhead of India’s social
cruelties. Also, to counter the influence of Gandhi, Ambedkar aligned
with another modern force: the Indian Constitution.

Ambedkar said that India would be at risk of losing its independence
again if Gandhian tactics of protest through civil disobedience were
allowed to continue in free India. Once freedom had been won, Ambedkar
said, everyone had to follow the law. He dismissed Gandhian protests as
“the grammar of anarchy". Yet, in Indian politics, it is this grammar
that has emerged as the primary technique.

Why Gandhi is pantomimed more than Ambedkar might have very little to do
with their castes, and more to do with what is easy.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’ *
