# No, the age of the Bollywood superstar is not over

*2022-08-28*

People don’t read books. They don’t read magazines, newspapers, or pay
for their online subscriptions. They don’t visit restaurants as
frequently as before. They don’t watch plays, comedy, art exhibitions,
or Test cricket, or even a one-day match, or for that matter an entire
T20 clash. Now, it appears, Indians don’t even go to watch Hindi films
in the theatre. What exactly are people doing then with their lives?
That is for another day.

Over the past several weeks, many Hindi films have bombed. They simply
don’t lure their old base, which is most of India, to the halls, a feat
that Marvel films manage. Many observers and theatre-owners blame the
top rungs of “Bollywood" for this—that most superstars today have no
talent; and that they nurture mediocre sidekicks who make duds.

The stars cannot blame their disgrace on the poor quality of their
films. If they need great films to deliver hits, what is the point in
being stars? The whole reason why they are paid tens of crores is that
they claim to have the power to override the discernment of people. A
power they do not seem to have anymore. Word-of-mouth can destroy their
films. Taking all this into account, many observers say that the age of
Bollywood superstars is over. But that is not true.

Film stars will endure, and even thrive. There can be no commercial
cinema without stars. The force of capitalism may sack the present
stars, but they will be replaced by similar people, maybe their ungifted
but beautiful children.

**You might also like**

Sebi sees no bar in transfer of NDTV shares to Adani

When AI makes art, what can go wrong?

How bond market is luring India Inc away from banks

Will the RBI have the gumption to follow the Fed?

Stature is a strange thing—people grant it to a few, who then have power
over all. Stature is like India. It’s an electoral democracy where most
people make some people very powerful. But it is hard to invent an
alternative to stature. Here are three reasons why a superstar exists in
a capitalist system.

One, a star is compensation for the fact that no one knows how to sell
anything. The best thing marketers have marketed is that they know what
they are doing. The fact is that a small fraction of what people try to
sell gets bought. It is very hard to sell because we really do not need
most things. And a story without a hero is among the most difficult
things to sell. The question, ‘what’s the story about’ has only one
answer—the whole story. A synopsis of a story is among the dumbest
things in the world. This is why a software feature that almost never
works well on otherwise sophisticated platforms like Netflix is its
prediction of what you may “like" based on what you have liked. People
have a complex relationship with stories. It is easier to sell them a
star.

Two, a commercial story should not be too good. It should not be many
things that excite a good writer—it should not be unique,
ground-breaking, complex, different or “push a new envelope". Instead,
it should be familiar, simple and derived from old stories. As a result,
a good commercial story looks almost exactly like a bad commercial
story. You can only tell the difference after the film’s release. Here,
again, a bankable star is compensation for the impossibility of a
bankable story.

Three, people need to form wrong opinions about some persons. In this
way, people project their opinions on another person and fall in love
with that person, not knowing they are only in love with their wrong
opinions. Thus, a star exists. (Also why you should never meet a star
you love.)

People who announce the demise of “Bollywood" stars point to the south
and say that south India makes better films because they have better
stars and as a result southern films are doing fine. But they overrate
the south. South India does make a lot of terrible films, and, as in any
movie business, most of them fail too. It may be true though that people
in the south continue to flock to theatres. But this could be because,
in terms of economy and economic behaviour, north Indian urban
middle-class is a few years more advanced than southern. The point I am
making is not only the fact that a typical multiplex ticket is more
expensive in Delhi or Mumbai than, say, in Chennai. It is that the north
Indian middle-class is less dependent on movie-watching for fun than
South Indian. The failure of Bollywood, in fact, is an omen. Within ten
years, southern stars too will begin to fail as though terrible films
are a sudden development.

The failure of “Bollywood" stars is not in the reduced lure of Hindi
cinema, but in their inability to drag people out of their homes. The
experience of going to watch a film in India is more torture than
entertainment. We have to survive the traffic, and the air, and the ugly
chaos of parking.

Hindi cinema is no match for the new India where “development" has
arrived. Then, of course, multiplexes take care of the rest of the
torture. That bad food and ten minutes of advertisements and ten minutes
of film trailers. The new stars, when they arrive, may not be able to
draw Indians out the way that Amitabh Bachchan could, but they will
still make millions watch movies.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Nitin Pai argues why* *India needs a Nitipath* *for its
civil services. Rajrishi Singhal writes double-speak can undermine*
*India's crusade at WTO. Long Story tells you which sectors in India
are* *most amenable to reshoring.*

 
