# Why T20 triumphs over intellectuals and purists

*2022-11-13*

However, the loss may still hurt a bit, and since Thursday, when India
lost to England in a semi-final of the T20 World Cup, Indians have come
up with various consolations. The comedian Tanmay Bhat tweeted, “test
cricket is real cricket". It was also a jibe at a type of serious men
who keep saying this.

The fact is that today the predominant version of cricket is the 20-over
version. Cricket is T20. It has eclipsed even the one-day game. In what,
you may ask, if you are of the serious type. And I would say, “in the
only thing that matters in sports—in popularity." What about prestige,
you may ask. Prestige itself is not so prestigious anymore.

**You might also like **

Adani eyes stake in Bengaluru airport 

The Android of smart home ecosystems is here

Why Mahindra & Mahindra is hitching a tractor ride

Never mind Sept quarter blip, Trent looks good

Test cricket is, of course, the most sacred form of cricket, but it is
like most sacred things—there is a broad consensus on its sacred nature,
but no one can say why, nor is there any deep emotion underpinning its
sacredness. Most people who love cricket do not watch Test cricket
anymore, even though they may track match updates. It is more event than
sport. They do not even watch an entire one-day match as they used to
before. In fact, if it were not for the 20-over version, cricket would
have stagnated or even shrunk in a distracted world filled with
addictive frivolities where even Hindi films struggle to lure fans into
theatres.

T20 has made cricket prosperous and deepened the love of its fans. It is
in the natural order of things then that its birth was difficult. It was
considered abhorrent by the sort of people who are very sure about what
is abhorrent.

T20 was born of a local necessity in England, where the young found
domestic cricket boring, chiefly because it was. A marketing manager
with The England and Wales Cricket Board, Stuart Robertson, suggested
that a 20-over version of the sport will draw people in. It was not
received well. Seven of the 18 country chairmen voted against it, and so
the decision passed narrowly. Many major cricketers and writers scoffed
at the idea. But, eventually T20 stormed the cricketing world, aided by
the Indian Premier League (IPL).

I was among the people who were certain the IPL would be a failure, but
in my defence I must say that my reasoning was not that it was an
inferior sport, but that for decades Indians had neglected domestic
sports because they were not really sports-lovers; rather, they were
looking for national pride and watched only international cricket. So, I
wondered, why would they watch a 20-over version of domestic cricket?

The triumph of T20 is a triumph against intellectuals and purists.
One-Day Internationals themselves had faced similar resistance at
various stages of the format’s evolution—when floodlights were
introduced, when the red ball was replaced by white, and when cricket
whites were replaced by coloured clothes. Purists called it “pyjama
cricket", a term that percolated down layers of society and inevitably
infected pretenders.

In any field, purists are usually a section of old-money folks who also
generally had good childhoods, and hence have reasons to love and
imitate the world of their parents. Their considerable influence in
media then influences middle-class pretenders. The third type of purists
are players who are direct beneficiaries of a particular tradition. Like
Sunil Gavaskar has reason to consider the straight bat superior to the
helicopter shot. There was a time when fine Test batsmen considered the
reverse sweep a quaint sacrilege.

In every sphere of human life, there are these three types of purists
who appear to uphold a sacred antiquity. They existed in the publishing
industry, and they scoffed at Amazon’s claim that it can sell books
online. They were in the film industry, scoffing at Netflix’s vision of
cinema that did not require movie theatres. Not very long ago, when a
Netflix film would be screened at an international festival, purists
used to boo.

In any given sphere, purists drive a way of the old life to ruin until
delinquent capitalists who are not in awe of tradition create something
new to save the old. They are insulted by the purists as crass
entertaining clowns. Then the honest masses who have not read enough to
pretend to be other people make that innovation a huge success. So the
purists lose, grumble and eventually accept the change.

I must confess that by far my happiest memories of cricket were at dawns
in December and January when I would be up in Mumbai watching live
telecasts of a Test series in Australia. I didn’t care if India played.
It was a beautiful spectacle that did not require the menace of meaning
or thrill.

So, I do not suggest that what purists try to save is useless. But what
they resist and what they insult is often precious.

Tradition survives by glorifying abstract things. For instance, the
central flaw in the consecration of Test cricket—that it is a true test
of the calibre of a batter. It is absurd that this hypothesis has
survived for so long because Test cricket is filled with great
stonewallers whose mediocrity is exposed in other formats. A batsman
needs to be more gifted to perform well in T20 than in Test matches. It
is easy for mediocrity to survive in Test cricket because the fewer
strokes you have, the fewer risks you would take and the longer you
last.

Endurance, in all walks of life, is nature’s reward for ordinariness.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.***Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Vivan Sharan writes on the* *lessons for India from the FTX
saga. Barry Eichengreen explains* *the trilemma of CBDCs. Long Story
reveals how the Chinese use* *Indians as fronts for scams.*

 

 
