# Time to admit India murders its own on the roads

*2022-09-11*

I am certain, though, that India does not wish to kill anyone. It is
just that it does not care enough to make extraordinary changes.

**You might also like**

Fines for fake online reviews might be on way

Adani to shake up ACC and Ambuja Cement boards

The reality check of demat accounts crossing 100mn mark

Do banks recommend MFs on merit rather than commission?

A few days ago, the former chairman of Tata Sons, Cyrus Mistry, died in
a road accident along with a friend. Authorities have since cited some
reasons for their death, none of which was their fault—that the car’s
driver lost control of it, that the two people who died were not wearing
seat belts, and that the airbags may have failed to cushion them.
India’s minister of road transport and highways, Nitin Gadkari, made an
ambiguous admission of guilt when, during a public event, he said that
he had succeeded in many aspects of highway-building, but safety was not
one of them. What he likely meant was that thousands die or are badly
injured everyday in accidents that are in part or entirely caused by
poor road design and the absence of basic safety features that are
common even in nations in Sri Lanka.

You would think it is difficult for a dignitary to die in a road
accident in India because the country behaves as if the roads are meant
only for them and the rest of us get to use them only because there are
not so many important people. Yet, even they die. Gopinath Munde, a
senior member of the Bharatiya Janata Party, was involved in at least
two accidents, that too while he was travelling in a car with a red
beacon. He lost his life in the second, in the heart of Delhi. Former
President Zail Singh, too, died in a road accident.

Cyrus Mistry died on a stretch of National Highway 48 that was known to
road officials and regular drivers as dangerous. It was a spot where a
three-lane road tapered into a two-lane. India rarely warns drivers
through meaningful signage of approaching danger. Also, Indians are
conditioned not to take any message from the government seriously.

As Indians we have a high probability of dying on the road. Our children
are at risk almost everyday. Yet, when we look at the matter
objectively, we have a feeling that we cannot do anything about it. Road
safety is largely an upper middle-class concern, and even in this
segment, the concern never erupts into fury. So politicians do not live
in fear of an Indian uprising against dangerous roads. In fact,
“development" to most Indians is a type of road on which you can go
dangerously fast.

The Indian justice system does not make it possible for citizens to
claim substantial compensation for negligence. That would also result in
chaos, as every kilometre of Indian road would bear evidence of some
serious and dangerous lapse by an authority.

Also, citizens are not without blame. We are among the worst drivers in
the world. We are addicts of civic disorder, and most Indians find rules
stifling. Also, every time India has made an extraordinary reform, it
has been only because it did not have any other choice. But accidents,
by nature, are rare even in India. It only brings some lives to a halt,
not all life. So India can continue without having to transform its
roads.

In fact, Indian roads may get even more unsafe as India keeps improving
them to increase speed, which improves the economy, but without making
them safer through design and stringent enforcement of rules.

Don’t I have anything hopeful to say?

I can try. Circumstances could arise that may trigger a movement for at
least Thailand-grade road safety. For instance, if several politicians
were to lose their lives in a short span in unfortunate road accidents.
Not a whole bus of them at once while they are being ferried to a
resort, but in separate incidents. Politicians tend to exhibit empathy
when other politicians die. After the death of Munde, who was in the
backseat and not wearing a seat belt, the then health minister Harsh
Vardhan said something that was unthinkable at the time—wear seat belts
even if you are in the backseat. Eventually, Munde’s death did not
change anything, but if there is a ceaseless reminder of how deadly
Indian roads are even for politicians, maybe a political will would
form.

Another phenomenon that can transform Indian roads might seem esoteric
at first glance because it is dependent on a proper right-wing plot. But
it is not impossible. The current political establishment at the Centre
appears quite keen to suppress dissent. Yet, it does not recognize how
important the idea of civic order is to subdue future public
demonstrations. A society that is used to chaos on the roads would find
it easier to create chaotic demonstrations that bring normal life to a
standstill. So proper roads, sacred markings and a greater enforcement
of rules would actually be a step towards exerting more control.

You may wonder if I prefer an authoritarian regime to unsafe roads. I am
just seeding an idea to help bring in civic order. This won’t make
demonstrations vanish; only make them more expensive.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’ *

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Nitin Pai tells fresh graduates to heed to* *Bombay Shaving
Company CEO's advice. Puja Mehra finds a trove of insights on getting
India’s institutions* *future-ready. Long Story offers a* *survival
guide for retail investors* *in a rough market.*
