# An application for the job of Twitter’s chief executive

*2022-05-08*

As I tell my readers once every six months (because people forget what I
tell them), there are only four kinds of people. The actor, the fan, the
builder and the philosopher. You are an actor. A builder, too. But
fundamentally, an actor. And actor is a blank canvas on whom people can
project what they wish to see. Actors tend to hire fans. Most
billionaires hire fans. The fan is an admirer of success and an imitator
of successful people. Fans may be the most hired people in the world.
Indian CEOs who are ubiquitous in the Valley have the bearing of fans.
In any office, fans rise because they are unthreatening. You, Elon, are
an actor-builder who is likely to hire a fan. What you need, though, is
a philosopher.

You may think you know Indians because America is filled with them, but
they are a bit different from people like me. I have never studied in
the West, or even lived there for more than 180 days at a stretch. It is
impossible for the West to colonize me. As a result, I can see Western
morality for what it really is—it is a way of speaking and not a way of
being. I sense that you see it, too, as you too come from another place.

You come from South Africa, a country of stark inequality. I am certain
that your family and friends often said the right things. But they never
really transformed the lives of the poor majority. So, somewhere in your
head you might know that morality is a way of speaking.

This means I can see your fight for “free speech" emerges from a culture
that cannot do anything without first couching a plan in morals. But why
waste time on morals when you can be honest, when you have a more
intelligent and logical reason to make Twitter a neutral platform:
Twitter can be consistent only if it is not human.

As CEO, I would draw your attention to how Western morality has made
Twitter expensive. Not as a company, the one that you are in the middle
of buying. You are, of course, paying more than what people who would
never be able to buy it, like columnists, say is its fair price. But
then, how else can one buy something that is not for sale? When I say
Twitter is expensive, I mean it as a platform to advertise on.
Generally, it is much more expensive than Facebook.

About 15 years ago, an Indian billionaire told me why The New York Times
was doomed: Because good journalism, by its very nature, is negative,
and no one wants to advertise on an unhappy page. Twitter, in general
perception, is an unhappy space. This makes it less attractive for
advertisers than, say, Instagram, but what makes Twitter expensive on
top of being unattractive is the moral campaign against Facebook and
social media in general by the vanquished Western liberal establishment.
The consecration of privacy, the denial that the anonymous data of your
boring life is a public resource, the promotion of the myth that
Russians interfered with American elections and other hyper-moral
campaigns have forced social media platforms to make themselves
inefficient as advertising vehicles.

To solve this problem, you need to be generous to Facebook. I know that
you are among the people who have defamed it. If it was in preparation
for buying Twitter, well done, but you are hurting yourself by going all
sanctimonious on it. I must confess that of all American billionaires, I
like Mark Zuckerberg the most, and one I have no doubt at all is good in
a banal way, which is the only way we can be good.

You must not underestimate the power of leftish lament.

Increasingly, tech people are behaving like writers. Most writers, and
other types of artists, have a sense of failure—because they are in
reality entrepreneurs and they are bitter because they have not
succeeded as well as some of their peers. As more smart people in tech
quit being salaried executives and attempt to be entrepreneurs, we have
a world that was never so bitter. We must learn from artists what
bitterness does. Not better art, but the opposite of art—activism. Whine
and lament, which used to be the preserve of artists, have now entered
the soul of tech. They will amplify any news that diminishes a
successful company or person. All this may not bother you as an
individual, but makes Twitter expensive.

A soulless robotic all-knowing social media platform is the only way a
person who is not picked by the old corrupt establishment can transmit
ideas to the world. And Twitter should find ways to make itself
affordable to the small guy.

Look, Elon, jobs have always come to me without my seeking them. This is
only the second time in my life I am applying for a job. The first was
when Pope Benedict XVI resigned and I applied for his job. (I am Roman
Catholic and celibate on most days.) The Vatican didn’t get back, and I
hope you don’t make the same mistake.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
