# The insufferable fuss over Rishi Sunak’s Indian roots

*2022-07-18*

In the end, the waiter asks you about the meal and you say it was good.
And he beams. I have never understood his glow. He behaves as though he
cooked the meal. You may argue that his behaviour is a flicker of
collective pride, a worker bee collecting an award for the hive. But
that is nonsense, not because he probably hates his job, but because if
you had instead told him the soup was disgusting, he would have said,
“I’ll tell the chef." No one takes a blow for the team, but everyone is
big on collective pride.

This phenomenon is the underlying reason why I dread people who are said
to be “of Indian origin" doing well, like achieving something big in an
advanced economy. Naturally, then, I brace for the day Rishi Sunak
becomes prime minister of the UK.

On that day, urban India will erupt in celebration. Indians will say,
explicitly, that they are proud. But about what? There will be
statements and allusions that there is something about Indians, which
makes them beat others; something mysterious inside us that is potent
outside India and evidently does not work in India.

But Sunak has very little to do with India. He was born in Southhampton.
His parents were born in Africa. He has come so far in Britain because
he is in a society where even conservatives, the very people who are
meant to speak the minds of common people instead of pretending to be
nice, do not discriminate between races. So he has done well because
modern Britain is not like modern India.

Usually, emotions have logical underpinnings. Even collective emotions
have reasons. But civilizational pride in foreigners “of Indian origin"
has none. It is plainly absurd. When Sunak triumphs and Indians gloat,
what exactly are we rejoicing? That we have good genes, like him? That
we emerge from a special post-Africa race that can create leaders like
him? That we created a global coaching class from where Sunak emerged?
That all Indians have the innate capacity to become prime minister of
Britain? This sentiment, of civilizational pride, is absurd for many
reasons, but the funniest reason it is vacuous is that Sunak’s bid to
lead Britain was made possible by a man named Boris Johnson, whose
leadership is proof that a great civilization does not make all its
members great. Johnson, the UK’s outgoing prime minister, had to quit
because of incompetence and scandals.

When Venkataraman Ramakrishnan won the 2009 Nobel Prize in Chemistry,
you can imagine the euphoria in India for a man who was born here but is
identified as “British-American". He felt assailed by the sudden pride
of millions of Indians and rebuked them for being absurd. Also, there
was a rumour that he had accepted a job offer made by an Indian
institution. He not only denied it, he also said, “I can categorically
state that if they did so, I would refuse immediately." He then
apparently felt bad and expressed regret for hurting Indians, who were
merely desperate to feel proud.

Indians rejoice the triumph of their own, or those whom they imagine as
their own, only in the West. We won’t get that ecstatic if a person “of
Indian origin" rose in, say, Africa. True racists are those who feel
inferior, not superior. Racism does not only in reside in insults and
abuses, which are actually very banal, unremarkable and lacking in
conviction. A more potent form of racism is in worship—like how resident
Indians look up to the West. In return, the West does not spend much
time thinking about India or Indians. So there is an unequal
relationship between Westerners of Indian origin and their resident
Indian admirers. Westerners of Indian origin do not appear to be as
proud of India as India is of them, nor do they consider themselves
Indians in the first place. But when it suits them, they do play the
India card. For instance, every now and then, I would see a writer or
academic “of Indian origin" make a decent living out of interpreting
India, and even Asia, to the West. But if some Trump supporter asks him
to “go back to your home country", he would say that marvellous thing,
“I was born in Houston."

Also, in the face of an anti-immigration wave, like the one Donald Trump
created, people of Indian origin attempt to include themselves among the
destitute migrants. What their audience does not realize is that there
is a difference between high-caste or wealthy Indian families that move
to the West in search of prospects, and the African, Latin-American and
middle-eastern poor who are often sneaked in. In a useful
generalization, the typical US-bound Indian reaches there after a rigged
race, as a consequence of his social equity or wealth, and therefore as
a result of a big head start over most Indians. This migration is very
different from what the West understands as migration.

Community pride is not always ridiculous. For instance, take the
national pride generated by Olympic triumphs. What the people of a
country are saying is that their nation invested and created systems
that helped talented athletes realize their full potential. But, as this
column has argued before, Indians are not in a position to claim even
this form of pride. Indian athletes who succeed at an international
level mostly do so because they have been trained in the West, or they
are so extraordinary that even the Indian government could not ruin
their chances.

Maybe, in our subterranean consciousness, we know that logical reasoning
will deny us the sensation of collective pride; so we take care not to
let reason interfere with our quest to appropriate a foreigner’s success
as our own.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’ *
