# How Aamir Khan nudges us to celebrate Forrest Gump

*2022-07-31*

We rarely hear people say, “The film was better than the book.” The only
time I have heard this, sadly, was in reference to one of my novels.
What we do hear often is, “The book was way better.” This is because
people who say such things are an insufferable group called
‘book-lovers'. They are clearly people with a talent for reading, who
think their ability is superior to more facile forms of entertainment.
But another reason why not many rate a film above a book is more
honourable. Almost always, a book precedes the film and there is
something petty about rating a derivative above its source. However,
there is a film that is so exquisite that it improves the novel it is
based on in the very territory where a book is so formidable—in the
writing.

A new film starring Aamir Khan, set for release on 11 August, gives me
an opportunity to get your attention as I extol *Forrest Gump*, widely
considered by filmmakers and ordinary people of two generations as one
of the finest films ever. Written by Eric Roth and directed by Robert
Zemeckis, it is based on a novel by Winston Groom.

The story is nothing, as stories usually are; merely a trick to lure
people into ingesting the writer’s actual intention, which is almost
never the story. A story is a delivery device, and what *Forrest Gump*
delivers is the wisdom of the fool. It is a whole genre in
storytelling—a slow person misunderstanding the sane, and in that way
accidentally arriving at philosophical truths.

The novel, which was published in 1986, is on its surface the saga of a
man who has a mental handicap as he fortuitously passes through big
historical moments of America. It is told from the point of view of “an
idiot”, as the protagonist describes himself. He clarifies, very early,
“I am closer to being an imbecile or maybe even a moron, but personally,
I’d rather think of myself as like a half-wit…”

The novel acknowledges how phoney it is for a writer who is not
diagnosed as an “idiot”, especially not by himself, to pretend to
understand the perspective of someone with such mental disabilities.
Forrest himself has a list of famous “idiots” in literature who were
unconvincing, and at one point says, “Mos of them writer fellers got it
straight—cause their idiots always smarter than people give em credit
for. Hell, I’d agree with that. Any idiot would. Hee hee.”

The novel establishes a loveable accidental philosopher from its very
first page, but it is the film that elevates him to an unforgettable
character by rewriting his lines. For example, the novel begins with,
“Let me say this: bein a idiot is no box of chocolates.” In the film,
Forrest seems to say something similar, but it is entirely different:
“My momma always said, ‘Life is like a box of chocolates. You never know
what you’re gonna get.’”

In another moment, a young woman visits her abandoned childhood home
with Forrest by her side. She flings a stone at her home. And we can
immediately sense that she may have been abused by her father when she
was a little girl. She picks stones from the mud path and flings them
all at the ruins of her home. Then she collapses. Gump tells us,
“Sometimes I guess there just aren’t enough rocks.”

This is a plain fact from a fool’s point of view—that she ran out of
stones to throw. But it is also a fact, in a heart-breaking way, about a
person’s rage against a crime. There just aren’t enough rocks. Only one
who does not think he is very clever can say this in such a powerful
way.

Storytelling has the problem that science once had. Every remarkable
truth has already been spoken. Every brilliant observation has already
been made. There is nothing new left to say. There are only newer ways
of saying old things. One way of speaking that modern storytelling uses
well, which the world beyond fiction seems afraid to employ, is the
endearing voice of the fool. In the real world, no one wants to be known
as one. But this is actually an underestimation of the influence of a
person who says wise things without being aware of his wisdom. The world
is tired of people who think they are very smart. What the great fools
of art, like Forrest Gump, suggest is that in many aspects of life, the
world might be open to “an idiot” who bumbles into truths, making us
congratulate ourselves for seeing the truth in the words of a simpleton.

The film creates new possibilities for the ‘philosopher fool’ beyond
what the novel had envisaged. Forrest not only passes through US
history, he also influences it. For instance, as a boy, when he had
braces on his legs, he walks in a staggering way, which captivates one
of the guests at his home—the young Elvis Presley, before he became a
star. “Say, man, show me that crazy little walk you just did there. Slow
it down some,” Presley tells the boy. The boy staggers, and that would
go on to become one of the most recognizable dance forms in the world.
This is not in the novel; it is a leap the film makes.

Never in the film does Tom Hanks, who plays Gump, try to look like
someone with a deficiency. He does not make exaggerated faces. He
doesn’t have to. When you consider this carefully, any person can pass
off as similarly disabled. Just stare at people imagining that they have
a mental problem; and they would appear so. Acting is not about making
faces; acting is almost entirely speaking. And it is all incandescence
when what’s spoken is already art in its written form.

Jenny: Do you ever dream, Forrest, about who you’re gonna be?

Forrest: Who I’m gonna be?

Forrest: Aren’t I going to be me?

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
