# What widespread vaccine hesitancy says about people

*2022-01-09*

All their lives, they could never abandon unhealthy food, or set out
every morning to perform meaningful exercise. But masking and sitting at
home they could do, and they enjoyed the righteousness of doing what was
universally considered the right thing. As pandemic articulation
increased, they exhibited similar enthusiasm in adopting mainstream
scientific ways to shield themselves, which included getting vaccinated.
With regular advice so convenient to take, they had no need for spurious
alternate medicine.

Different from them in every way, one of the fittest individuals on
earth, the top-ranked tennis player today, Novak Djokovic, has
questioned the wisdom of vaccines. The Serbian faces deportation from
Australia because he is not vaccinated. He is of the view that a human
body should be allowed to develop natural immunity to viruses by
allowing infection, which has a sound scientific basis (for the fit). He
also believes that vaccination is dangerous, which is a view that alarms
scientists.

Like many who are obsessed with fitness, and are actually fit, Djokovic
appears to have very little respect for conventional wisdom. In the
field of fitness, conventional wisdom is designed to appease and protect
the lazy majority who yield easily to temptation, and such advice is
generally useless or harmful to a talented minority with a high
threshold for pain, training and sacrifice.

Not everything Djokovic does is rational. He has a mystical side. He
seems to think emotions can interact with water, that some ancient ruins
have healing powers, and he has claimed he can move objects through
‘telekinesis’, that thing with a scientific ring to it because it ends
in ‘nesis’. And, he speaks with admiration of a doctor who showed him
that if he held a bread toast in his hand it would drain his physical
strength because gluten does to him what kryptonite does to another
famous man. Even so, it is not clear where Djokovic’s suspicion of
vaccines comes from. His mystical side? Or his health instinct? His
stand against vaccination is not very different from the positions of
many health gurus in the West who usually make sense and have followings
of sane people who seek liberation from mainstream follies, poisons in
common foods and mediocre medical advice.

I am vaccinated, by the way. It makes sense to me because I believe
forces of capitalism have driven the pharmaceutical industry to make it
safe for me. But many people doubt this.

Till recently, we thought all the anti-vax noise was from a small loony
group in the US. But now it is evident that they were a sign, like most
extreme groups are, that they are merely one end of a spectrum of
thought. Today, it is clear that vaccine hesitancy is widely prevalent
across the world. A few days ago, French President Emmanuel Macron said
he wished to make life “miserable" in his country for those who resisted
vaccination.

What does vaccination hesitancy say about people?

There is no single quality that unites the vaccine-hesitant. They
comprise all sorts of people, and they raise insane and reasonable
objections. What is clear is that the real master-infection in humans is
belief.

We tend to claim we arrive at our beliefs after much investigation of
facts. But the fact is that we believe first and then pick evidence that
suits us.

When information is scarce or hard to access, people submit to an
authoritative view. We know, for instance, that if Indians had poor
internet speeds, they would be better informed. But when a society is
rich, individualistic, and there are various designer ideas on every
issue to choose from, a large number of people tend to question
mainstream scientific wisdom.

We appear to pursue facts and truth, but we are also oppressed by them.
Much of what we do is to save ourselves from the strangeness of truth
and veer towards the interesting paranormal half-truth or lie, even if
it is terrifying, as the terrifying is often interesting.

In effect, when we appear to debate health or act on it, it is not
really about health at all. Rather, it is about what we find
interesting, the process. Just like tea is usually just a way of having
sugar, a health debate is mostly just a way of asserting our
personality.

There is a very Indian image that comes to mind. It is of an ambulance
transporting a heart. The organ is in an ice box and time is of the
essence because someone somewhere needs it. A whole section of the city
comes to a standstill, roads are block, a scrawny man rushes from the
ambulance to the airport, where he has absolute right of way, and when
the plane lands with the icebox, another city comes to a standstill as
the icebox races to a hospital. Why this makes me laugh is that most
people don’t take care of their hearts at all when it is inside their
rib cage, but they love the melodrama of transporting a heart for a
transplant.

The drama around vaccination is a bit like that. People generally never
show any evidence that they wish to be healthy, because it is tedious to
do so, but they like the fuss of taking a stand on health, because
taking a stand is essentially an extension of their personalities,
beliefs and culture.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
