# Why contentment could let people down as India grows

*2022-12-04*

This is a bad omen for people who are prone to contentment.

To be satisfied with what one possesses is one of our most famous
virtues. This means that it is a personality type that has been, over
centuries, promoted as an admirable quality. The content are usually
people who inherited money that has grown faster than their nation’s
economy, or those who used to be ambitious and unhappy but have decided
to be unambitious and unhappy, or those who never had the will to exert
themselves.

**You might also like **

5 charts show why the world is cheering India's economy

India will spend <span class="webrupee">₹</span>3,500 crore on toys to
outplay China

Why housing real estate remains a losing proposition

This manager's small-cap fund gave 40% CAGR returns in 3 yrs

Over the next five years, if there is tremendous and unprecedented
economic progress, content people will be priced out from their good
lives. If they are tenants, they will increasingly find it hard to
afford their rent; if they own their homes, they will be under pressure
to sell and move away; they will also see other sort of people surround
them in their neighbourhood who may make them feel poorer; good hotels
and holidays will become unaffordable to them. It would still be cheap
to be middle-class in India, but it will become very expensive to be
considered rich or upper middle-class . A bit of all this has already
happened.

You may argue that India is so poor, its median household income so low
and its middle class so stingy, or if you want to say it nicely, ‘price
conscious’, that there will always be a band of good life that remains
affordable. This is a country where poverty subsidizes the consumption
of the middle-class and wealthy. Discounted food, electricity and
conveyance meant for the poor are enjoyed more by the affluent, the
section from where most of the content emerge. So you may argue that
even if the content are priced out of their old affluent life, India
will provide them a new affluent life that is affordable to them.

But this argument is flawed. Let us look at what is about to happen.
Over the next five years, the affluent who have not prospered will see
their lifestyles deteriorate. And affluence is primarily a feeling of
being affluent. Also, precisely because India is, broadly speaking, poor
and its default setting is to assume everyone is poor, affluent
lifestyles are led by very few. Unlike in advanced economies or even
other middle-income nations like Thailand, the difference between fine
living and second-best lifestyles is quite steep and perceptible.

There is worse. The fact that I have faith in India’s immediate
prosperity does not mean I am optimistic about the quality of life. In
fact, it is going to deteriorate as it often happens w

hen you unite Indians and money. Urban traffic is going to get worse,
the air will kill, faster highways will be fatal and crimes will rise.
The third-rate quality of our cities will not reduce the economic
activity of society. We will still get richer because we have a low bar
for living.

The cost of fine living in India is not entirely about living well. A
significant chunk of the expense is merely on excluding a majority of
Indians. The good life, in India, is an island that keeps out ‘real
India’. That is the meaning of gated colonies and ‘progressive schools’
and ‘fine dining’.

As the qualify of life in India deteriorates in the wake of the
country’s economic progress, the content will be priced out of their
islands, too, that guard them from the tumultuous ocean of India. They
will increasingly find it hard to escape India within India, and that is
a kind of poverty.

You can see a bit of this already. Look up five-star hotel rates in Goa
this December—they are generally higher than the room tariffs of similar
hotels in Western holiday destinations, Dubai or Singapore.

After Annie Ernaux won a Nobel prize for literature this year, I
encountered many times this passage from her book *Simple Passion*:
“When I was a child, luxury was fur coats, evening dresses, and villas
by the sea. Later on, I thought it meant leading the life of an
intellectual. Now I feel that it is also being able to live out a
passion for a man or a woman."

You may have guessed that the point of this passage, and the reason why
so many people shared it, is in the beauty of its final sentence. But I
was struck by Annie Ernaux’s second line.

I can see the literary beauty in a sentence that claims passion is a
“luxury", but I don’t find that true or convincing. What is true is that
one of the great luxuries of the rich is the option they have to lead
“the life of an intellectual".

It is a luxury that has brought humanity great riches. Of course, there
were and are the ungifted rich who dabble in mediocrity and sermonizing,
but almost all our intellectual wealth has come from the gifted rich who
had the “luxury" to do what they wished to, or who built great
sanctuaries for pure arts and sciences.

It is this ultimate luxury that some of India’s content people will try
to hold on to even as they slowly turn bitter, unable to accept that
they are not the country’s elite anymore. Thus do we arrive at the
origin of intellectual lament.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’ .*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Rahul Narayan writes why* *MPs and MLAs must retain special
rights* *to free speech. Look at the GDP data to* *know where the budget
would go, says Rajrishi Singhal. Long Story reveals* *the mess Oyo is
in* *just before its IPO.*
