# Why Musk appears to be in search of an oppressor

*2022-04-24*

India’s billionaires are widely quoted, but we do not know their voice.
On most matters, we don’t know what they think. When they speak, they
are mostly uninteresting. They are not even boring in distinct ways.
Meanwhile, some American billionaires have become more popular and
influential than most politicians, writers, artists and holy men. And
they have done this without paying millions to promote themselves. This
is because they can say things and not be ruined in return. Elon Musk,
one of the richest men ever to have lived, has used this freedom on
Twitter to offer a new form of entertainment. What he does answers this
question: What happens when a person has no oppressors? Yet, Musk is
interesting not because a person who cannot be oppressed can say
anything. That is too rudimentary; in fact, that is something even
self-absorbed people with no children can apparently do. What makes Musk
so fascinating may have a much more complex answer: When you have no
oppressors, you would set out to find them.

Almost everyone in this world feels oppressed. They don’t like it, but
it does not mean they don’t need it. Without a sense of being oppressed,
people are lost. This torment satisfies the soul. Too much of it will
break us, but its disappearance could send us afloat in a frictionless
void.

Most of us do not seek oppression because we do not have to. It is
always bearing down on us. It comes from familiar places.

When scholars speak of oppression, they make it seem as though it is
something grand, like politics or history or culture, and that everyone
is oppressed by the same massive force. It’s not true. They’re talking
about what oppresses them, not you. We are oppressed by the familiar
just a notch above us. People are seldom harmed by things that are much
grander than them. You are more likely to be oppressed by a mere boss or
family or a street thug than, say, an ideology. And your househelp is
probably more oppressed by her husband or your security guard or you
than by billionaires. Despots see their oppressor in the US. American
leaders see their oppressor in half the population of America, what they
call “polarisation". In this way, many things that Elon Musk does could
be part of a quest for an oppressor, a despicable force whose existence
can make life more meaningful.

A few days ago, he offered to buy Twitter and take it private. He framed
it as a moral action—to liberate Twitter from its “woke" employees who
try to control the transmission of extreme ideas. Setting forth a moral
justification is a Western habit and technique. It is not a gimmick; it
is more culture. But usually, the moral cause presumes that the saviour
is bigger than the evil that has to be slain. In his war against killers
of absolute free speech, those hyper-moral people who think some ideas
do not deserve to be transmitted, Musk conveys that he is up against
something much more powerful than he is, even though he can buy up a
corporation where those censors work.

Wokes can often be so far removed from goodness that they make bad
guesses about what it might be. As a result, they are always fighting on
behalf of others, and they can become more zealous than the people they
claim to protect. Musk says they have diminished Twitter. And also made
Netflix boring, as he tweeted after it revealed it had lost subscribers.
It’s amusing because the success of Tesla, the electric car company that
Musk bought and turned into a modern giant, owes much to the first
generation of wokes who had a hip paranoia about climate change. Telsa,
like Apple, is in part a woke creation. Maybe there are good wokes.

In any case, I do not think wokes have much destructive power. And, even
if they number in millions, I wonder how well they can fulfil Musk’s
potential requirement of oppressive friction. There are far bigger (and
genuine) oppressors, such as climate change, that Musk himself has
publicly identified.

Like other billionaires in the West, who cannot be oppressed by things
that oppress others, Musk has been locating it in greater things, like
climate. So oppressed is he by the future of our planet that he has
advocated migration to Mars. Visions of such tormentors may have driven
his ambitions for years, making him pursue various technologies, send
off rockets and dig tunnels on earth to transform how we travel.

It must be hard for Musk to find oppressors in humans, but he finds them
in machines. He is among the wealthy people, like Bill Gates, who have
warned of extreme artificial intelligence and advanced dumb machines
that could misunderstand instructions, go rogue and end up colonizing
the world.

It may appear that Musk is not as oppressed by the idea of death as
other American billionaires who have invested in finding a cure for
ageing. But it must be oppressive for him too, even if it’s not an
inevitability anymore but just another rival. Musk reportedly expects to
liberate himself from death by downloading his brain onto a computer.

As a very wealthy man, Elon Musk must inescapably be something of an
oppressor himself. These days, the banal unhappiness of adulthood has a
special name, ‘stress’, and perpetrators of it are called ‘capitalists’.
Like Jeff Bezos of Amazon, Musk too has been accused to driving his
employees hard.

A few days ago, amused by how few people show up for work at Twitter’s
head office, Musk suggested that it be turned into a shelter for the
homeless. This was a response to a method that ordinary people have
adopted to fight their oppressors—by being bad slaves and spending more
time on what they love. That, Musk does too.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
