# The office is outmoded, but it will still survive

*2022-10-09*

For now, they are asking nicely. Except for Elon Musk. Across the West,
and even in India, the top management is pleading with employees to
return to physical office, at least three days a week. The era of
‘remote work’, they say, is over. In asking employees to return, the
bosses are even explaining the concept of the office to them, chiefly
the good bits. Apple’s Tim Cook wanted employees to return to work at
least three days a week to restore “in-person collaboration". Even US
President Joe Biden pleaded with federal employees to return to their
workplaces. Over the past few weeks, Indian tech companies used a
respectful tone as they advised employees to return. Elon Musk has not
been so nice about it. In June, he issued a memo that said remote work
was no longer acceptable. “Anyone who wishes to do remote work must be
in the office for a minimum (and I mean minimum) of 40 hours per week or
depart Tesla. This is less than we ask of factory workers." He also
tweeted that those who “think coming into work is an antiquated concept…
should pretend to work somewhere else."

**You might also like**

Adani in talks with global investors to raise $10bn 

Why Indian music apps are a let-down: 4 charts 

GST profiteers return <span class="webrupee">₹</span>500 crore to
customers 

Why banks are buying more g-secs than they have to  

Yet there is a widespread belief today that the office is obsolete. This
is not only the hope of many young executives, but also the fear of
seasoned bosses.

But I believe the office will survive. It is even possible that the
office will endure for many years.

Bosses tend to like offices. From there, affection for the office
progressively decreases down the hierarchy. But, historically, bosses
win, especially when they have a fair point. At most, they will have to
throw money at the rebellion. Usually, freedom-seekers do not find
freedom; instead they make slavery more lucrative.

Why do bosses like the office so much? On this matter, there are things
they can say in public and things they cannot. Their reputable reasons
are known. The ethical idea of ‘productivity’, for instance. They like
offices because physical human meetings are hi-res and are the most
efficient. Also, people marinating for hours in an office build stronger
bonds with their colleagues. Everyone who has gone to work knows this is
true, even in Indian offices where people waste a lot of time drinking
tea and chatting. But, what the bosses also want to say but cannot is
that most people do not like their jobs, they only do them because they
have succumbed to the addiction of a monthly salary and will not be very
productive if they are in a home environment. There is also something
else that the bosses are not saying.

Bosses like the office because it reaffirms the fact that they are
bosses. What is a king if he cannot see his kingdom? Freed of
oppressors, bosses truly enjoy working in offices, and remote employees
are an inconvenience that does not improve the boss-hood life of bosses
in any way. So, bosses have good reasons to save the office.

Also, the popularity of remote work might be exaggerated by journalists
and a type of creative techies who are drawn to the idea of freedom. It
is possible that many people like to go to an office every day for
various reasons that has nothing to do with work. In Mumbai, for
instance, people have such terrible tiny homes that they would rather
endure going to work against many odds, a phenomenon that some
intellectuals have often misunderstood as “the spirit of Mumbai". People
also like going to offices to be liberated from spouses, parents,
in-laws and children. And, people do enjoy meeting their colleagues and
even pleasing their bosses.

Most people cannot handle loneliness for days on end, and remote work is
exactly that. It is what writers, and other types of artists endure
because there is no other efficient way of creating, and even they
cannot take it. Some writers have tried to liberate themselves from the
loneliness of writing by coming up with plans like the ‘writing lunch’,
during which, they claim, they have lunch with friends and still write.
This is not writing, it is having lunch. But the point is that even
artists find it hard to work for days without meeting other people
casually; like people who are less tiring than lovers and family, or
just colleagues.

The obsolescence of the office is not new, from a purely technological
point of view. Over the past two decades, the reasons why people should
be physically present in an office every work day have lost their
rigour. The idea of remote work itself is not new. The office, in fact,
is a post-obsolescence triumph. Like representative democracy, which
emerges from an ancient time when people in a locality had to elect a
human to represent them and be heard in the capital. Today, we do not
need a human representation; our voice can carry anywhere in the world.
But obsolete things survive because modernity is just the name of an
age, and people live in various eras.

Since the rise of the internet, the death of the office has been invoked
now and then. About 16 years ago, after heavy rains in Mumbai trapped
thousands of people for hours on roads and in vehicles, there were
murmurs across the city about the antiquity of the office. Some
companies seemed to have already taken the view seriously. A
spokesperson of IBM India told me that hundreds of their executives were
encouraged to work from home, and were given financial incentives to do
so. But even then, bosses thought remote work was a euphemism for
slacking. Even then, some people craved freedom from the workplace and
others said they loved going to office. Since the time, the office not
only survived, but thrived.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Nitin Pai argues why Elon Musk's* *"everything app"* *must
be resisted. Rajrishi Singhal finds a common* *link between loan
haircuts and freebies. Long Story asks: can a* *regulation for EV
makers* *become a road bump?*
