# Can American billionaires really find a cure for ageing?

*2022-04-03*

Is ageing a disease or technology? Growing old, one way or another, is
decay over time, but is it a glitch that nature was indifferent to; or
is it a spectacular idea to get rid of the old so that the new can
thrive, an idea that has endured over other ideas? In the end, what does
nature want—immortal life or never-ending change? We know what most
humans want and it is to not age. Not our fault; old people have been
bad ambassadors of old age. If ageing is a disease, it must be cured. If
ageing is a technology of nature, it has to be made obsolete; in that
case, humans have to hack nature itself.

Respectable scientific opinion says that ageing is a disease. This does
not deny it the sacred status of being ‘natural’; cancer, too, is
‘natural’. All diseases are.

Like us, American billionaires, who are enjoying life immensely, do not
wish to age. But unlike many of us, they have the burden of being in a
position to do something about it. Several of them have invested in
bio-tech firms to find ways to cure ageing. The latest to join them is
one of the richest people on earth, Jeff Bezos, who has made a
substantive investment in a new firm called Altos Labs, which is
believed to have a commitment of $3 billion from its wealthy backers.

It is all auspicious. The self-interest and greed of entrepreneurs have
benefitted all of humanity more than the complex pursuit of the public
good. And, for the first time in the history of human greed, we have a
situation where the motive of wealthy entrepreneurs is not profit, but
something more valuable— their lives. And to achieve the cure, these
biotech firms are a rare mixture of romantic pure science and hard-nosed
practicality. The billionaires who are funding them emerge from a
culture that assures them that well-financed human genius can solve
anything. Indian billionaires, on the other hand, probably like to visit
temples to solve the same problem.

I am on the side of American billionaires but there are some omens I
cannot ignore. Medical sciences have been a big disappointment over the
past three decades or so. They have become good at prolonging death, not
prolonging life. If you are not dying, if you are healthy and fit, they
offer little. Yes, there have been vaccines, the accident of Viagra and
excellent pain-killers. And, you may argue that high levels of health
and fitness in some people is a consequence of high-quality scientific
information available to us. Even so, from the point of view of the
young and healthy, the field has made only modest progress. Forget
breakthrough technologies for those who are not dying, there is
confusion over basic concepts except for the evil of sugar, which is
settled. Is bad cholesterol really bad? Should you have fish oil? Do
vitamins help? Should we have more minerals to balance the excess purity
of our water? Is a keto diet wise? Is intermittent fasting beneficial?
No one is sure. Why should we believe a ‘cure’ will be found for ageing?

Spanish scientist Juan Carlos Izpisua, one of the marquee hires of
Altos, told the newspaper El País, “I am convinced that within two
decades we will have tools that not only treat symptoms, but also can
predict, prevent and treat diseases and ageing through cellular
rejuvenation.” As a lifelong reader of popular-science news, I know that
when someone says something will occur in “20 years”, it is not based on
an analysis of facts, but a way of saying, “We have nothing to show now
but we’re hopeful.”

Until a few years ago, there was much talk around telomeres, structures
that form the tips of some chromosomes. Ageing shortens telomeres, which
influences the degeneration of a cell. Scientists and I had fervent
hopes that this held the key to a cure. But the buzz around telomeres
has died.

American tech billionaires believe that their billions will attract the
brightest scientific talent to find a cure. But do only the bright make
breakthroughs?

What does the history of innovation suggest, even in computer science?

It all begins in banal ways. A particular stream of human endeavour
appears to acquire bright prospects and a whole generation of bright and
dim people flock to it. From this, accidents occur and a breakthrough is
rarely what was set as “a goal”. In fact, even problems whose solutions
were clear objectives set by governments, like cheap computers and
linguistic transliteration, were accidentally solved by those working on
far more frivolous issues.

It is possible that a cure for ageing takes a very different approach.
It need not be an accident, it could be a direct solution to a clear
problem. But no one disputes that a cure requires a vast number of
scientists and engineers, all of whom will be sourced from a very small
portion of the human population—the lucky who went to school and among
them a small fraction who love science or who were forced to study
science, and among them a small fraction who will resist the lure of the
metaverse or artificial intelligence to pick biotech, and then the few
among them who would have the capacity to endure that special quality of
such endeavours: that it is mostly very boring. Meanwhile, we know that
there might be a biotech genius rotting away in a slum in Mumbai never
to have even known what science is.

So I wonder if the fastest way for Jeff Bezos and other billionaires to
cure ageing is to take a chance and solve the problem of abject poverty
among children first. If all the children in the world get a fair shot
at life, surely that will increase our odds of finding that great
elusive insight that could keep us young forever. This, I admit, is the
least sexy solution for a scientific problem that I am aware of, which
makes me even more optimistic about it.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
