# The other Gandhis who may need to give up leadership

*2022-03-21*

Every now and then there are elections, the Indian National Congress
fares poorly, and all sorts of people then call for liberating the party
from the Gandhi household. The party’s top rung has a series of dinners
in Delhi. People can’t talk, it seems, without eating. Unattributed news
would leak that the Gandhis are willing to step aside, but then the most
powerful members of the party would plead with the family not to quit,
and the family would gracefully agree to stay on formally and in other
ways.

This has been the recent history of the Congress and the chain of events
was repeated again a few days ago. But with every electoral defeat,
calls for its liberation from the Gandhis have grown bolder and louder
within the party and its long tail of intellectuals, activists, media
observers and other politicians who are not called politicians. Even
people who don’t vote Congress call for the resignation of the
Gandhis—just for a lark, like how Indians honk without knowing why.
Asking the Gandhis to resign is an Indian subculture.

There are Gandhis in other spheres of Indian life, people whose surname
is not Gandhi but were born into privilege, into luck, and who are
classy in an old-world way. They can be found today in academia,
responsible journalism, activism, policy circles, think tanks,
environmentalism, something called civil society, art, culture and the
subjective humanities establishment. This is the long tail of the
Congress party, the fellowships of those who used to feed off its power.

They had two informal political jobs: to promote the party, and to
promote its values. As we can see, the long-tail, too, has failed. The
metaphorical Gandhis of the long tail who control, run or occupy the
liberal Congress ecology have not been able to stop the emergence of a
new India that is the exact opposite of what they hoped to achieve. But
they are more distraught by the failure of the original Gandhis in
elections. And they now say aloud what they never had the courage to say
in open, that “the Gandhis should go". But what about them ? Shouldn’t
they, too, face the consequences of failure, and make way for more
talented evangelists of their gospel?

To understand the scale of what our metaphorical Gandhis control, let us
first look at what the Congress party stands for. To understand anyone
fully, we must consider their best side, not their worst. So do not let
the party’s reality interfere with the marvel of their first principles.
The party is an umbrella for various pressure groups and regional
grouses. As a result, it stands for a broad and unique set of absolute
virtues that no other political party in India can easily adopt without
antagonizing a sizeable voter base. Generally in modern India, if you
feel you are prospering or you feel you have some cultural swag, you
lean towards the Bharatiya Janata Party, but if you feel unlucky,
depressed, bereft of job prospects, poorer than before, culturally
insecure and seek political compassion, you are in the Congress frame of
mind. Thus there is a significant moral reason for the party to exist
and also an obligation to achieve power.

The metaphorical Gandhis are in the same moral space, which is why it is
not surprising that they directly and indirectly campaign for the
Congress. A decade ago, when the party ran India, its national advisory
council that “advised" the prime minister was made up of social
activists and intellectuals, most of whom, in terms of class and luck,
were long-tail Gandhis. They failed in their evangelism as badly as the
Gandhi household and the Congress party.

Liberal ideals of Western extraction, which once had many prophets in
the Congress long-tail, are faceless today in India. The ideals
themselves have faded away. Since my childhood, I have seen people
describe themselves as socialists, communists, human rights activists,
anarchists, environmentalists and other things. What exactly have they
achieved? The same people are now fighting the same battles on behalf of
the same kind of people, who are in fact worse off if you take into
account how far ahead the middle classes and rich have moved. So what
did all that activism achieve? What did all their angry essays achieve?

I do not say that the Congress long-tail has been useless. I am sure
they have somehow made some lives better, brought justice to some and
influenced useful policy. But this is like saying the original Gandhis,
too, have not been a washout. The Congress does win some seats here and
there, and even form a government here and there. I say this is not
enough.

Our most important idea is that the lucky should take care of the
unlucky, and this idea in India is managed by those who are not smart
enough to succeed and will not make way for the more talented to take
over.

Historically, human progress has been triggered by three forces: when
greed drives the economy, when a society’s second rung revolts against
the elite in the masquerade of activism, and when people do
compassionate things because human misery breaks their hearts. From what
I see around me, most of India’s progress is because of market forces
and the enchantment of greed—of entrepreneurs looking to prosper and
politicians with the same goal. The humanitarian movements controlled by
old money have done very little. This has been India’s real disaster.
Organized compassion and direct action need exceptionally smart people.
Our crisis is that we have no mechanism to filter incompetence out of
humanitarian efforts. Maybe one great humane act they can do is sacking
themselves so that smarter people can take charge. They need to do to
themselves what they ask the Gandhis to do. Get out of the way.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
