# The folly of trying to fix inequality

*2022-01-23*

But, you know, they don’t do any of that. They only curse inequality, in
spurts, every time fresh data says the same old thing. As has been going
on after a humanitarian outfit called Oxfam revealed more unsurprising
data on ‘inequality’ in India—that India’s richest 10% had 45% of Indian
wealth, while the bottom half had only 6%. Maybe such numbers make the
Indian affluent feel more smug than bad. But perhaps it also angers
them, in an entertaining sort of way, when they learn that the wealth of
the richest 98 Indians is equal to that of the bottom 40%.

Why do beneficiaries of inequality lament inequality? Do they mean to
say, “Look we cannot impoverish ourselves to make society equal, but we
want the poor to become as rich as us, and get the same chances, and
make life more competitive and difficult for our children"? Do you
really believe this?

Can inequality be solved, or is it a natural consequence of human
nature? Actually, is equality one of those thought experiments of
European philosophers, like equilibrium or communism, which the world
has taken too seriously? Across the ages, everywhere, among the first
things that happen to an advancing society of humans is inequality.

Is social ‘inequality’ merely a complaint of the 98 percentile against
the 99th percentile? Millionaires loathing multi-millionaires and
multi-millionaires loathing billionaires? Leonard Cohen was a
millionaire when he sang, beautifully, Everybody knows the fight was
fixed; The poor stay poor, the rich get rich; That’s how it goes;
Everybody knows. So are Elizabeth Warren, Arundhati Roy and many other
politicians and activists who say less poetic things about inequality.

Some argue social inequality began with the invention of mass
production; some argue inequality is so fundamental to human nature that
it did not have to wait for the rise capitalism. The master and the
servant may have slept in the same room before the Industrial
Revolution, but they were still master and servant, were they not?

Even if inequality is a natural consequence of advancement, it doesn’t
mean it isn’t evil. We don’t have to consecrate all that is natural.

In the past century, many modern billionaires have addressed the matter
of inequality with a degree of respect. And what they have said is that
the solution to inequality lies in capitalism. It is a flawed argument.
An omen of this flaw is this metaphor often cited by capitalists: “A
rising tide lifts all boats." This imagery is meant to suggest that
economic growth will lift all sections of society. But then a rising
tide is an egalitarian force that lifts all boats equally; while
economic growth, though it lifts everyone, lifts the rich much more than
the rest.

Still, all things considered, the poor today may have a better standard
of living than Mughal emperors. One of the richest men to have ever
lived, Andrew Carnegie, while accepting that inequality is a creation of
capitalism, wrote, “Much better this great irregularity than universal
squalor." But this does not reflect a correct perception of poverty.
Many segments of the population may not be as deprived as before, but
since the rich have more, those who are not rich feel poor. Poverty is
relative. The very existence of the rich creates it.

The notion of ‘basic necessities’ for sustenance is an enduring example
of nonsense. Indian policymakers may find it hard to believe, but the
fact is that people don’t live to just eat starch and sugar. They want
many experiences that some humans invented and other humans experience:
fun and comfort, for example. Every time something improves lives, its
denial to the majority becomes one of the new meanings of poverty. That
is why, as long as there are the rich, there will be the poor. It is not
a healthy condition for the world. From this vast grouse against the
rich, articulate people create strife.

The mechanism of greed can increase the general quality of life, but
can’t fix inequality because its point is inequality. Do-gooding is
inefficient because it tends to attract people who are not very good at
solving problems; India’s modern history offers living proof of it.

There is another way of looking at the issue of inequality. If you use
money as a measure, there will never be equality because that is the
nature of money. To that end, inequality is a false lament.

People in general do feel lucky about their gifts—their youth, health,
family, love, beauty, strength, intellect and how gorgeous their village
is. They do not live in perpetual gloom over being in the bottom 50% at
all. Yet, because money is so easy to measure, many of them get
conditioned to consider themselves lesser people than some.

The real failing of the world is not in its inability to create an
impossible economic equality, but in its inability to persuade people to
see the truth—that money is just one of the many things that matter.
Intellectuals have tried, of course, through their happiness indices.
But maybe others who are more likeable should try.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
