# Why our road minister’s statements make us so happy

*2022-06-19*

Every now and then, a man from the government says modern things. Then
nothing happens, and he returns to say more modern things. He has the
air of someone from the 80s. Yet, among all Indian politicians, he says
the most urban things.

Nitin Gadkari, India’s minister of road transport and highways, almost
never talks about grand but useless things; instead, he talks about
things like parking and roads. On Thursday, he said he was mulling a
reward of <span class="webrupee">₹</span>500 for any Indian who betrays
a vehicle parked in the wrong place to the authorities. In the recent
past, he has mulled over increasing fines for traffic violations many
folds, reducing deaths on Indian roads by 50%, ensuring that all
government vehicles be electric, building “multi-level hybrid flyovers”
and changing all vehicular horns to sounds of Indian musical
instruments. Recently, he set a daily target of building 60km of
highways.

Gadkari appears at press conferences where he offers details like a
chief executive. Once when a journalist asked for toll exemptions for
the press, Gadkari said Indians should learn to pay for services. Also,
he uses a hydrogen-powered car.

In contrast, every time Prime Minister Narendra Modi has pitched
modernity, he has been inscrutable—for instance, he said India should
build “twin cities” and “smart cities”, and that what the world thinks
is climate change might merely be the inability of ageing people to
endure weather.

Gadkari is today a harbinger of simple joys, even though urban Indians
are not so naive as to believe that everything he says will come true. A
few years ago, he said Indians tend to plan for a year; we should
instead plan for 100 years. Who else in the government says things like
that? Most of the time, he is only mulling, and not doing. Even so, we
are not used to politicians who know how to mull what is good for the
pubic.

An unsung source of small human joys is any news of future
infrastructure. Something about bridges and roads of the future in a
place familiar to us makes us feel that life is going to be more
interesting than the banal present. If we ever compile the history of
news on the future of commuting, we will realize that most of it never
came true, but all the honest fantasies of prophets of urban planning
did bring some hope to their generation. It is in that way Gadkari makes
us happy.

His rise to national prominence is a bit odd. Why has it happened? He
was never a mass leader. Not so suave like Arun Jaitley that he could
never win an election. Still, in a country where there is probably only
one national politician, Gadkari does not have much public appeal beyond
some pockets. Usually, people who are very useful to their organizations
but are not superstars remain unknown and useful. But there is a
mysterious and ethereal force that promotes him. What else can explain
the fact that when he says something sensible and modern about civic
order, which normally is not as newsworthy as esoteric useless things,
his words get prominent media coverage?

This makes me feel that Gadkari’s mulling is a part of the ongoing
cultural reformation of Indian society, and that in the future, Hindu
nationalism is not going to be only about Hinduism or nationalism, but
also about civic order and quality of life. I await this transition of
nationalism from pride to something more useful—like shame.

India is a middle-income nation that behaves like a poor nation. There
is simply no economic reason anymore why India has to be so difficult to
its own people. But Gadkari is more harbinger than prophet. He is more
successful with statements of intent than execution. The reason why
Gadkari’s mulling never changes anything is the same as why all of
India’s good intentions fail. Gadkari and India keep asking Indians to
do the right things—drive in your lane, park correctly, follow the
rules. But this is not how advanced countries created civic order. Those
governments first did a spectacular job of creating conducive
conditions. They made good roads and trains and platforms, used
intelligent design that made flouting rules difficult and provided
people all the facilities needed to ensure only malevolent motives could
lead them to break the law. On the other hand, in India the road design
itself, and even traffic signals, can kill us.

If a government does its job well, citizens would follow its rules. Many
of our bureaucrats don’t believe that. They have a dim view of Indians.
They say if you provide the best infrastructure, Indians will make it
the worst, or even steal it. This is a country where a whole iron bridge
was stolen. Administrators have a misanthropic view; they despise
people. I am not going to say they must have nobler view of people
because there is no evidence that people are noble. In fact, I feel that
the problem with Indian administrators is not misanthropy, but its wrong
application.

Contrary to what administrators say, across the world, when a government
creates a public utility of great quality, citizens follow all the
rules. There is evidence even in India: the Delhi Metro. The adherence
to rules on this and other such air-conditioned transit systems is many
notches higher than what Indians exhibit on the roads. It is as though
we are a proper middle-income nation aboard the Metro and a banana
republic outside. The reason is not mutual respect. People don’t follow
rules out of gratitude or regard for infrastructure creators. It is the
fear that if someone can run a good service, it will also be good at
implementing hefty fines.

Civic order originates in fear. Every other origin is merely a lamer
word for that.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
