# Why people are better than their opinions may suggest

*2022-04-17*

Someone says Will Smith should not have hit Chris Rock. A woman
disagrees; she says there are consequences for laughing at a woman’s
disease. Her husband, who on other days thinks free speech is nonsense,
says a bad joke has a fundamental right to exist. The wife, who does not
actually think any man punches another man for the greater good of
women, says that Smith single-handedly started “a conversation” about
alopecia. The husband believes a bad joke is important because it is
from bad jokes that good jokes arise. Then, his wife says, you will be
punched in the face by decent husbands until you get the joke right. The
husband says consequences have to be in proportion to action; all of
civilization is bad on proportionate justice. The wife says it is the
same sort of men who think molesters should not be punished severely.
Her husband says women have an exaggerated view of their traumas. Things
go south after this.

We have seen this many times—two reasonable people have an argument,
which slowly turns bitter and their positions turn extreme. So, it may
appear that people only pretend to hold reasonable views and when they
are pushed and provoked, they expose their extreme theologies. It may
appear that there is a Taliban streak in all of us, and that is why the
world has become such a sick archipelago of sacred wounds. But that is
not really what is going on. What if people are better than their
arguments?

In academic anthropology (by which I mean anthropology that is not art),
there is something called Symmetrical Schismogenesis. In this
phenomenon, people assume the opposite views of their rivals and then
take these views to extremes simply to differ from the other camp.

People, in general, do not begin with extreme positions. But when they
are challenged by someone sanctimonious or aggressive in other ways, or
someone they do not like, and they have to defend themselves, they tend
to assume a hardline position that they actually do not fully believe
in. We do that because in an argument we are impelled to magnify our
differences. Also, people try to create a theoretically pure version of
their argument to explain their point, for which they have to appear to
believe in puritanical versions of what are otherwise sensible ideas.

Most people arrive at strong opinions out of intense dislike for a
particular kind of people. This is the most underrated cause of public
opinion. It is not opinions that cause divisions; it is instinctive
dislike that creates opinions. Simply put, people form opinions that are
the exact opposite of those held by public figures they despise. In that
way, they descend from the middle-ground into theology.

Thus refined scholars of something called ‘post-colonialism’ would take
the extreme opposite view of what an aggressive village strongman holds;
and the pragmatic Indian middle-class will take a view in sharp contrast
to suave people who are always telling us what is the right thing to do
in any situation. Women who have disliked the hijab begin to fight for
the right of Muslim women to wear one; and Hindu women who themselves
wear something that resembles the hijab oppose the garment fervently.
And fans of Test cricket, who despise the facile lure of shorter
versions, overstate their admiration for mediocre stonewalling batsmen.

To many scholars, Symmetrical Schismogenesis is why the world is doomed.
We are drawn to the extremes. But there is a reason why the world has
survived, and will survive. Schismogenesis is a way of speaking; it is
not a way of being. I do not believe it has made people lose their
moderate, banal middle grounds.

Most people are practical and don’t wish the extremes in their own
arguments to occur. They do not easily share their views, which in any
case are unremarkable. So their numbers are not reflected in the media
noise. Even on Twitter, most extreme views are probably only morning
cortisol.

There is us, and then there is our projection of ourselves. When we are
made to defend our biases, especially by despicable people, we take
extreme views but discreetly we hold our middle ground.

People who have ‘extreme right-wing’ views are better people, I notice,
than what their tweets suggest. And, people who have very moral
‘left-wing’ views are not as good as their tweets would have us think.
This is because both types of opinion-holders cannot match the extremes
they project.

The subterranean power of the middle-ground is admirable, considering
how useless the moderate stance is. It is dull compared to passionate
extremes. Take one of the worst stories ever told—Goldilocks and the
three bears. In this story, a girl goes into the home of three bears and
has porridge that is neither too hot nor too cold, but just warm. That
is it. I have covered most of the plot. The fame of the story has
nothing to do with its plot. The wisdom of the middle-ground, which is
what the tale is about, is usually a doomed fairytale, tweet, post,
article, column, cartoon, story, poem, novel and film. In human
communication, remarkable or extreme views are entertaining, hence
rewarded.

One of our good fortunes is that not everyone wishes to be interesting,
and it is through them that the middle ground holds a toe-hold in
communication. But radicals from extreme camps keep assailing it by
defaming ‘fence-sitters’ and ‘the pragmatic’, and attempt to disgrace
them for not “taking a side”, and for not having the clarity of a moral
position. But then, the clarity of ideology is merely the thirsty seeing
very clearly a mirage. No one sees better than the deluded.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
