# What’s the ‘West’ and why does it praise others so often?

*2022-03-28*

We were reminded this year that ‘the West’ is not ‘White people’.
Russia, for instance, is not the West, according to the West and also
Russia. Some people say Japan is a part of the West. But that is because
they think if a country is rich, and has stand-up comedians and fair
elections, it must be ‘the West’. But is it possible to spot ‘the West’
on a map? I don’t think all of the US will make it. Maybe the West is
not a region. It is not even most people in Europe and North America.
But the West does exist. Some scholars say the West is an idea. Scholars
who say something is an idea usually mean it is a good idea. The West
probably is, but if so, it is a good idea that thinks there is no other
good idea, which makes it something sacred, like a religion. But then
the West has been a sacred idea for so long, its modern description has
to be more than that.

I think the West is a set of behaviours. For instance, it talks a lot.
It is always engaged in articulation, especially about things you may
not have thought possible to talk about. The West is big on compliments.
It appreciates other people when they do something agreeable or
fascinating, or when they fall in line. It has awards, tributes, odes,
panegyrics, epitaphs and other forms of appreciation.

You may think all this is human nature, but the uniqueness of the
Western way is in the degree. Before the West’s influence, other
cultures did not invest so much effort and resources in articulation and
paying public tributes. Even now they don’t. We Indians are rarely
effusive in praising others in a foreign land, for there is something
immodest about that. But I know people from the West who land in a
foreign country and take little time to start singing praises to its
artists, even declaring some of them “national treasures” when they
already are national treasures. This may seem trivial but is in
actuality a visible side of the powerful technique of subjective
acclaim, a method of persuasion.

The West is also big on self-loathing and self-whipping, which too are
ways of talking. But one of the most important aspects of the West is
that its political impulse is Christian, especially of its atheists and
rationalists.

The substantive part of Christianity is not anymore its fables and
magic-realism, but its ancient obsession with the transmission of a
moral idea. This, too, is about talking.

No other faith wishes to convince you of how right it is than
Christianity through sermons and open debates. Ancient Brahmins, on the
other hand, worked very hard to keep everything secret. It is possible
that even the bit of articulation other faiths began doing was in
response to the spread of Christianity, which believes there is only one
right path, and everyone has to be persuaded to see it that way. On this
medium of communication, the Christian restlessness to transmit a moral
idea travel almost all major ideas that define the West —democracy,
individual liberty, equality, environmentalism and so on. There is only
one way to live, govern, and be right, and that is the way of the West.
Everything else is evil, unless it is esoteric like innocuous cultural
festivals, colourful saris and ‘mindfulness’. The origin of the European
Enlightenment was in Christian monks learning obscure languages so that
they could argue with people of other lands and show them why the
Christian way was superior. The arguments brought philosophical ideas to
Europe, in which elites marinated for decades, talking, talking,
talking.

You will never hear of China or Russia seriously try to persuade you to
adopt their political ways. They may praise themselves, run a clumsy
propaganda wing, exaggerate their past, but they do not spend time on
proper evangelism. But the West never tires of asking people to be like
it. That is why it keeps talking about ideas that are more abstract than
they seem, like equality and rights; and celebrates those who fall in
line through prizes like the Nobel. And it condemns people who defy the
Western way as despots and oligarchs, who are somehow different from its
presidents and billionaires.

Nelson Mandela, even though he was wooed with Western praise, was too
smart to fall for those charms. Once, when an American journalist asked
him why he was friendly with people like Fidel Castro, Yasser Arafat and
Muammar Gaddafi whom the West condemned, Mandela’s answer was, “One of
the mistakes which some political analysts make is to think their
enemies should be our enemies.” This observation arrives at the very
reason why the West is so sanctimonious. It praises nations, too, in
self-interest. Ukraine’s current misery and miscalculations are partly
traceable to Western compliments—first for its “democracy” and other
Western appearances, and now as it gets wrecked, for its “courage”.

The West is smug because it believes that it has reformed the world. And
it has transmitted this hypothesis the best: that without the West and
its invention of organized compassion, the world would have been filled
with savages, alpha men would have run amok, women would have no joy,
widows would have been burnt and the unlucky would have been abandoned.
But the records of olden-day Western intellectuals point to something
else—that mostly everything the West claims was its invention was taken
from other civilizations that flourished long before its rise. Also,
there is no evidence that customs like ‘sati’ in India were widely
prevalent. One of the most absurd triumphs of Western historians is to
have convinced some of us that Indians had no qualms burning girls alive
until they were reformed by some nice guys. All of reformation itself
must be a sham; it lets some people take too much credit for the
inherent banal goodness in most people.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
