# The thin line between joy and misery on family holidays

*2022-06-26*

Married people go to some of the most beautiful places on earth to
fight. I once saw a couple, standing in a spectacular cove, arguing over
something, after which the man flung his wallet on the beach and walked
away; his wife, remarkably, picked it up, and went the other way. In
Cinque Terre, a cluster of coastal villages in Italy, a man who had to
carry two huge suitcases uphill and his wife, who had probably given the
taxi driver the wrong address, said nasty things to each other in the
backdrop of the Mediterranean Sea. Later, on the main street, a woman
dragged a suitcase, sobbing. No one knew why, but could guess. There is
a certain trauma that can only be caused by the other sex. Often I have
felt that a couple visiting a war memorial is war that has come to make
fun of a memorial.

This April in South Goa, the quiet of a resort was shaken by a woman in
a suite screaming at her husband. She was saying she had had enough,
that he was useless, that she was going back home with the kids. The
husband’s defence, if there was one, was not audible. The next day, she
yelled again with new information. A few weeks ago, as a flight from
Paris landed in Delhi, an angry woman told her husband, who was rocking
an infant, that she is never travelling with the baby or him ever again.
It was pure misery, she said. The husband rocked the baby harder, as if
to remind her that he does not slacken on his domestic chores. Even in
Antarctica, as a cruise-liner passed by giant icebergs, an old couple on
the deck fought over a chore the man had failed to do that morning.

I have often considered starting a movement to ban people who have been
married for over seven years from entering beautiful places for the same
reason why toxic industries are banned in such paradises.

Yet, it is for them that the beautiful places wait and it is for them
that the finest inventions of the travel industry exist. The lone
leisure traveller exists, but is rarer and less precious than a family
on vacation. Even though people spend a lot on themselves, when it comes
to travel, they feel they are not worth it at all as individuals and
splurge only when such an expense can be witnessed by their most
powerful critics—their family.

In plain sight, it certainly does appear that people love family
vacations. In fact, all life on earth appears to be sombre people
waiting to go on a family vacation.

This summer, the urban Indian middle-class made passionate travel plans,
having been restricted by the pandemic for two years. And for most
Indians, probably most people in the world, a vacation means a family
holiday. But do families really enjoy these? I do very much, but I am
never surprised when I look around and see marriages and families
falling apart on vacation. I never see so many distraught people back
home and I almost never see miserable locals. Anywhere on earth, the
most visibly unhappy people are families on vacation.

The objective of a vacation is to flee home, but then philosophically,
spatially, spiritually and emotionally, a large part of home is the
family. Thus, on a family vacation, people flee home without realizing
that they are carrying most of their home along. In fact, when they were
back home, they didn’t have to share so much time and space with each
other. Everyone had their own rooms, routines, work and friends. But on
a vacation, a family is thrown together. A family is many beautiful
things, but it is also a fellowship of wounds and grouses. And when this
fellowship is squeezed into a space smaller than home for long days,
things can go wrong in memorable ways.

A middle-class Indian couple with an infant on a first world holiday
will mostly suffer. Without the cheap labour of a maid and their
mothers, they will be in shock. Everything that Europeans make look
easy—like cycling or kayaking with infants strung somewhere—looks very
difficult when Indians try to imitate it. Older children are not so much
trouble beyond their whining about how bored they are, unaware that the
vacation is too expensive to say stuff like this.

The other Indian demographic group that suffers on foreign vacations is
of old parents who have been brought out of gratitude. You walk down,
say, London or New York, and you would see an old couple from an Indian
small town, looking dazed by the amount of walking they need to do, the
hard work that is required to use the metro system, the extraordinary
taxi fares as though the West defines hyperinflation, and the inedible
food. Sometimes, there is no torture like the gratitude of your
children.

Tourism is a recent invention, especially tourism for people who are not
part of a royal family. For most of our history, people travelled on
work or on pilgrimage, or because they had no choice. A whole family
moving to another town to squeeze into a smaller home, for fun, is still
a bit odd.

People who have experienced love, companionship or children, or are in
the embrace of a home in other ways, find it hard to holiday alone. What
the lone traveller in a beautiful place misses is context. Why are you
here? That you are some place all by yourself because it is beautiful is
not a convincing answer. It is not just that we need to share a moment.
We also need to be witnessed. Without a witness to our day, we are
anonymous. It is as though life does not take our memory of ourselves
seriously; it needs another memory to confirm it. Human experience is a
two-factor authentication of an event. From this arises the entire
tourism industry, and a bit of strife.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
