# Why so many bought into the global cult of crypto

*2022-11-27*

I cannot prove it, but I am convinced that the people who waited in
queues for a whole night to buy an expensive phone were also among the
first to buy Bitcoin. Today, as cryptos collapse, I wish to present a
brief history of how cryptos became mainstream, and what it reminds us
of human nature.

I won’t begin at the beginning, but at what is convenient. In 2008, the
Western financial system collapsed, giving greed a bad name. In the
aftermath of the crisis, someone who called himself Satoshi Nakamoto put
out a paper that showed how a financial transaction does not require the
inconvenience of trusting an intermediary, like a bank or a government.
Nakamoto proposed a currency called Bitcoin, which would be created from
nothing by a network of computers as they perform computations to create
it. Its value is not underpinned by anything valuable except that people
want it and it is finite. It was peer-to-peer money that was a rebuke to
central banks and governments.

**You might also like **

Mid-caps, small-caps a good bet, but watch your steps

Govt readies ambitious plan to lift sagging exports

Wary microfinance lenders go for secured loans 

How MarketsMojo’s Mohit Batra stands apart in PMS field

This is not the origin of cryptocurrency. Crypto emerges from government
paranoia. Years before the birth of Bitcoin, the National Security
Agency of the US pondered the idea of cryptocurrency in academic papers.
Even though these papers anticipated that such a currency would be a
threat to the government, they appeared to talk about it with a degree
of respect and fondness. In fact, some people have speculated that
Nakamoto, whose identity is not known yet, was from the US government.

At first, Bitcoin was known to only a few software engineers, especially
egalitarian coders who spoke like artists, suffered from things that
ailed artists, and were always complaining about money, corporations and
government. But slowly, Bitcoin attracted Beautiful Losers, if I may
borrow a term from the title of musician Leonard Cohen’s unsung novel.
These were the underdogs of America who lived in the hope of favourable
anarchy. Many of them were not techies or people who could fully grasp
what Nakamoto’s white paper tried to say. What they saw was revolution
against evil banks, paper trails and the end of paying protection money
to the government.

People think that an idea is transmitted in its most powerful way by
domain experts. This is not true. Domain experts do talk well about
ideas that they fully understand, but it is people who don’t know too
much—dilettantes, enthusiasts, fans—who infect the world with their
enthusiasm for ideas that are new to them. They were the first
evangelists of Bitcoin.

When Nakamoto set out to explain his idea, the circumstances were
conducive for it to become religion. The financial crisis of 2008 left
many people poor, nervous, pessimistic and angry at the establishment,
and it accentuated the anxiety of those Beautiful Losers whose mental
health was already poor. Then some of them heard of this mysterious man
who created money from air. The anonymity of the founder, and his
vanishing, contributed immensely to the cult of Bitcoin. It gave Bitcoin
a degree of delinquency, anarchy and selflessness. It was all so
Bohemian, the exact opposite of global banking. People who were
susceptible to believing began to believe.

The first real-world transaction using Bitcoin is believed to have
happened on 22 May 2010, when one Laszlo Hanyecz bought two pizzas for
10,000 Bitcoin. That would be, even in today’s fallen token price, about
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>1,300 crore.

As the cult of Bitcoin grew very powerful, the price of Bitcoin soared.
The early buyers grew very rich and could not stop talking about it
because they were new to success. They also spoke of the many ways in
which Bitcoin would change the world. They were not charlatans. Cons are
usually very poor transmitters of ideas. It is the delusional who can
infect. And they infected millions. Many cryptocurrencies came to be.
One spoof token was created, with the face of a dog, to lampoon the
craze for cryptos. This spoof crypto, too, became valuable.

Cryptos promised anonymity of financial transactions and diminished the
power of legal tender. In that way, cryptos promised a form of
hyper-democracy that reduced the nuisance of government in the lives of
people. It is a surprise that governments across the world allowed
cryptos to grow so big.

It is in the very evangelical DNA of American tech that it transmits an
idea as a moral necessity that will unify the world into some version of
the West. This happened with the internet, mobile phones and social
media. But governments have no reason to cede power so easily and
everything that is supposed to free us ends up regulated.

A government-approved crypto is not a crypto, it is just a fancy form of
fiat money. We are today in a phase where governments are slowly
transforming cryptocurrency into something more familiar and old.

Very soon, the entire crypto system will begin to resemble the financial
system it was designed to overthrow. That is because the way of the
world has a good reason to exist. The world we have is a consequence not
of what people say, but of what people actually do.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*

  
**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Manu Joseph writes how the* *global cult of crypto* *found
so many believers. Sarah Green Carmichael tells why* *middle managers*
*at companies deserve gratitude. Sandipan Deb writes* *why college
graduates regret* *what they chose to study. Long Story reveals how*
*Adani is giving jitters* *to south Indian cement companies.*
