# The dubious value of winning battles on social media

*2022-03-06*

When two nations are in a conflict, the region from where poignant
photographs emerge is usually the country that is hiding something
better than the other one. It seeks to be morally overvalued by the rest
of the world. This overvaluation is known as “winning the social media
war”. Palestine and Kashmir, for instance, have always been winners of
such a war. And more recently, we are told by jubilant people who lead
their lives by a “moral compass” that Ukraine is winning the “propaganda
war”. But does it matter? Is there any substantive value in winning a
social-media war?

Since the invasion of Ukraine by Russia, most of us have been flooded
with heartbreaking images from Ukraine. In every war, there is always
that little girl who is holding a toy, crying her goodbye to her
handsome dad, who is in uniform, kneeling. Many of the stories are real
and stirring. But some have turned out to be fake. For instance, a
popular video clip of a Russian warship asking Ukrainian soldiers on
Snake Island to surrender, with one Ukrainian defying the order through
an expletive. We were told the Russians then blew up the island, killing
all on it. It was endorsed by Ukraine’s president Volodymyr Zelensky.
Ukraine even named the ‘deceased soldiers’, and announced posthumous
awards, but it emerges that all those soldiers had surrendered and are
alive.

In other spurious news that Ukraine or its handlers have successfully
transmitted, ingenious Ukrainians have hacked into the phones of
advancing Russian soldiers and are hearing “everything”. And of course,
there have been moving images of Ukrainian civilian women taking up arms
to defend their nation. And even of a male journalist claiming that he
will stay put in a city under siege and defend it, making me feel
sheepish because if Russians ever invade Gurgaon, I may be tempted to
tell them exactly what to bomb. Even as stories of valour came in, the
million-odd Ukrainians who fled were not shamed as cowards, but
respected, correctly, as victims.

The world is awash in the perception that Ukrainians are good, funny and
intelligent people, ruined by a mad Russian. Zelensky himself has become
a mythical figure across the world for his defiance and willingness to
become a martyr. Even a video clip in which he plays the piano with a
body part that is not meant for playing the piano has becoming
endearing, which it is.

It is hard to dispute that Ukraine is “winning the battle of hearts”,
but then it is usually won by those who lose the actual war. So, does
winning the social-media war have any value, or is it just a feeble blow
delivered by the vanquished? What has all this new global love for
Ukraine got it except more encouragement to prolong its destruction?

Exaggeration and hyperbole are not entirely useless. They do defend the
weak against the strong. They travel faster than dull facts, they are
infectious as news, and they get the world’s attention and thereby serve
as a shield for the oppressed or handlers of the oppressed. This is the
foundation of activism itself, but for it to work, it needs the villain,
like a politician, government or corporation, to have shame at least for
tactical reasons, and hence be afraid of sustained defamation. But
outside this framework, where the interest of the strong is greater than
their need for compliments, the social-media war is largely useless.

I am certain public opinion matters to Russia’s Vladimir Putin. But,
even though he has moved to block Facebook in Russia, like many
strongmen, he probably knows that social media often represents the
public opinion of a public that does not matter.

There are many ideas that win the social-media battle but lose the war.
The liberal campaign against Brexit, for example, and in India, the
campaign against Aadhaar in the name of privacy. Hundreds of millions of
Indians are lucky that the hyper-moral lost that battle. There are, of
course, ideas that were popular on social media that eventually won in
the physical world. Like the campaign of middle-class farmers against
farm reform, but its social-media noise had nothing much to do with the
victory of the movement, which drew public support in a few states
through conventional ways of creating fear and by recruiting thousands
of farm labourers to demonstrate on the streets for months.

Social media is not an equal place. Some news does better than the rest.
The ideas that usually win are simple, moral and negative stories
delivered to victims or bystanders who have no stake in the matter.
Ukraine is perfectly poised to win, even as it faces destruction in the
real world.

Russia has tried to counter Ukraine’s popularity with its own
propaganda, but it was doomed because social media is a bad conductor of
the views of the morally grey. On Thursday, just as I was getting
alarmed that I am surrounded only by good people who transmit only
Ukrainian or Western propaganda, I finally got a bit of Russia’s
infamous “disinformation”. Scott Ritter, the former United Nations
weapons inspector in Iraq who had become the moral face of America’s war
in Iraq and whom The New York Times had described as “the loudest and
most credible skeptic of the Bush administration’s contention that
Hussein was hiding weapons of mass destruction”, gave an interview that
was posted on YouTube in which he said Nato was “too weak” to stop
Russia, and that Ukraine’s government, though led by a Jew, was run by a
“neo-Nazis”.

Ukraine was quick to denounce him as a Russian agent. I got that news
instantly. Too many good people around me.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
