# How AAP could win a single state and change India

*2022-01-30*

There has been no progress in the state. If anything, it looks uglier,
like other parts of India cursed by something called ‘development’,
which means delayed road projects, a lot of holes dug with good
intentions, and piers that hold nothing. Covid has made Goa poorer, too,
with high-spending tourists staying away. In any case, I do not know
another state government more undeserving of tourism revenue that the
Goan one.

I would like AAP to win Goa, or Punjab.

I am more curious than political. If AAP gets control of a region whose
statehood is not ambiguous, unlike Delhi, and if the party can take full
responsibility of the state, with the police and entire bureaucracy
firmly under its authority, it would be the start of a great experiment
in our democracy.

AAP’s victory in Delhi demolished an old Indian hypothesis—that you
cannot win an election without being corrupt. If AAP wins a proper
state, we will get answers to several questions. Can a government in
India be truly clean? What happens in the short term when a government
is clean; can clean politicians at the top end corruption in every layer
of governance below them; or is corruption the inescapable compensation
for inefficiencies in the system? In effect, does the same force govern
the corrupt bureaucrat and local Goan taxi-driver who fleeces because
his legitimate wage is too little?

In the first place, are all types of corruption bad, or is there good
corruption? In her book, *China’s Gilded Age: The Paradox of Economic
Boom and Vast Corruption*, Yuen Yuen Ang says there are four types of
corruption. Petty theft, grand theft, speed money and access money.
Petty theft is the bribe extracted by minor politicians and bureaucrats.
Speed money is the bribe citizens pay bureaucrats to get access to
services they have the right to get free. Grand theft, in the Indian
context, is the large embezzlement of public funds by powerful or
refined politicians. Ang says that these three forms of corruption stall
economic growth and impoverish people. But the fourth type, “access
money’, is far more interesting. It refers to the massive bribes
businesses pay to make things happen, or go away.

Ang says that China is a corrupt place but it has progressed as its
predominant form of corruption is “access money". Typically, in economic
evolution, societies suffer the more destructive forms of corruption;
then they progress to the “access money" phase. One of the things it
does is create new projects very fast. It could be an airport in a small
town, or a monopoly online retail store. The lure of access money has
locked China’s powerful bureaucrats in a competition to promote massive
and complex projects; and to kill competing forms corruption like petty
theft, grand theft and speed money.

If AAP is true to its word, it will try to end all four broad types of
corruption. It will find it easier to end the form of corruption that
Ang says has helped China: access money. And the forms of corruption
that AAP will find hardest to kill are the more lethal ones that lower
the quality of Indian life and ruin businesses. But then the party has
promised it would end all forms of corruption— the petty and the more
sophisticated.

Also, AAP would be in a position to change one highly visible form of
chaos—roads. The only thing rational on an Indian road is what has
caused Indians to be so weird. Corruption and incompetence create poor
and even comical road design, which encourages Indians to continue their
callous ways of driving. Bad driving, like corruption, is a form of
compensation. In a full-fledged state, the most visible evidence of
AAP’s effect would be on its roads.

AAP is idealistic about governance, but practical in some matters. It is
a modern Hindu party that will not antagonize Hindus, within reasonable
limits. Also, it may not favour tourists over locals by, say, letting
app-based taxis arrive. Also, I don’t get the feeling that the party has
respect for the news media. It won’t waste its time trying to promote
free speech and all that. It is not a naive organization anymore that
tries to imitate some imagination of European liberalism and ends up in
a whirlpool of chaos. So there is a lot going for the party to focus on
taking on corruption.

If AAP wins and brings about more aesthetic classrooms in government
schools, and cleaner and smarter public hospitals; makes life cheaper
for the poor and middle class through generous subsidies, as it has done
in Delhi; brings about orderly traffic, humane public transport; and it
cleans up all layers of the government, the party would transform Indian
politics forever, because then the older, larger and more conventional
parties in other regions of India would have no choice but to transform.

If AAP takes full control of Goa or Punjab, and it is unable to end
corruption, or becomes corrupt itself, or it is unable to transform the
quality of roads or public transportation, we can then accept we are
probably preordained to be doomed. There is peace in that. Hope is a
form of unhappiness, but the certainty of doom is peace.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
