# What Kerala’s moneylenders understand about India

*2022-01-02*

I spent a lot of time with one major money-lending family of Kerala. I
will refer to them only as ‘Family’.

Their most important brief to their staff is that when a person comes to
pawn her gold, it is a very serious moment in her life. So, the staff is
instructed to be solemn. They are to abandon laughter, banter and the
phone, and respect the moment. It will deeply move my mother—to know
that pawnbrokers always knew how she felt.

The Family also follows another important point of decorum, in response
to their belief that the moneylender, no matter which village,
municipality or era he might be in, is a neighbour, essentially. So
small talk must be made with customers, which like most successful small
talk is not designed to extract information, but results in its flow
anyway.

Most of India’s gold is bought by Malayalees. Yet, you will almost never
see women bedecked in gold jewellery, the way Tamilians are.
(Jayalalithaa even had a gold belt, which was as large as a wrestlers’
belt.)

Malayalees don’t exactly love gold; they love what gold can do. A
marketing executive of the Family told me, “For Malayalees, gold is
practical thing. That is why Malayalee gold is often ugly and chunky,
and all-gold. There is no stigma in pawning gold anymore in Kerala. Its
innate purpose, for a Malayalee, is that it is a collateral."

Today, 90% of the revenues of Kerala’s big non-banking financial
companies comes from gold loans. But this is not going to last. A future
looms where the number of Indians who pawn their gold will stagnate or
decline.

It was partly this fear of a future crisis that made the Family send a
few thousand executives out to spy. Their job was to meet and have a
casual conversation with “anyone who conducts an economic activity" and
belongs to a segment that conventional banks will not lend to. It was a
vast survey of Kerala’s bottom rungs, but the surveyors were asked not
to make it look too formal. The Family always got its best information
from casual chats.

The employees chatted up over 100,000 men and women and the results
confirmed the Family’s fears. Increasingly, most Malayalees did not wish
to pawn their gold in times of emergency. Worse, many of them did not
have any gold. A set of modern behaviours was eclipsing an economic
pattern that was precious to the Family. Malayalees have steadily been
prospering, and in a few years, they will not be pawning gold for
contingency funds. They may dip into their savings or might even qualify
for personal loans from regular banks. They might even assume more
fashionable debts through credit cards. This is the reason the Family,
like other gold-loan companies in Kerala, have tried expand to the rest
of India, but it is inevitable that in just a few years the rest of
India, too, will not need gold loans.

This is why the Family decided to get into subprime loans across India,
lending to those who represent higher risk. Their existing customers did
belong to the bottom 90% of India, but still, people who pawned their
gold were among the upper rungs of this group. Now the Family opened its
safes to men and women who borrowed from street-corner moneylenders at
exorbitant rates of interest because no one else would lend them money.

Most Indians are entrepreneurs. And most of them borrowed for business
or for an emergency, or to just survive, and at rates that translate to
48-60% a year, and in some cases, by some measures, many times higher.
What fascinated the Family while studying the survey report was that
small entrepreneurs could afford exploitative rates. Something about
Indian life and prices was structured in a way to absorb the high cost
of street loans. The Family decided to lend them
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>10,000-15,000 at 24%.

But the most important feature the Family introduced was not the risky
loan. It was equal daily instalments. “The small vendor on the street,
he doesn’t have the time to come to us and pay," the head of the Family
told me, “He has to shut his shop to go and pay his interest. Shutting
shop for an hour costs money. So we go to him every day."

All major gold loan corporations in Kerala have extraordinary brand
appeal in Kerala. The message that they have conveyed is that they are
in a highly moral business, which is to replace the exploitation of
street money-lenders, who used to convert clients into bonded slaves,
and thereby service a market that the larger impersonal banks did not
care about, and also fund poor entrepreneurs whom the government was
unable to serve efficiently enough.

But there still is a stigma attached to money-lending. Even though all
banks are in the business of lending, non-banking finance companies,
especially the Christian money-lenders of Kerala, have to grapple with
the moral stain that emerges from Christianity’s reproach of usury.

A German called Jakob Fugger, regarded as among the richest men who ever
lived, changed this around 1515 CE. He allegedly bribed Pope Leo, who
legitimized profiting from moneylending. But then, later popes reverted
the stain. What is beyond dispute, however, is that moneylenders
everywhere and in all forms had excellent reasons to exist.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
