# The una-anarchist who saw evil in organized empathy

*2023-06-18*

As a columnist, I have never needed a reason, like a news angle or even
your interest, to talk about things. So, to discuss the philosophy of a
forgotten public figure, I did not need him to be in the news. But I had
to wait for the death of a man widely known as ‘Unabomber’ to talk about
his ideas. Between 1978 and 1995, he detonated crude bombs that he
mailed or hand delivered across the US. He killed three and wounded more
than 20. His victims were chosen by him, but he had no personal grudge
against them. To him, they were symbols of technology and
industrialization, which he blamed for the “disaster” that was modern
life. His victims were mostly employees of universities and airlines,
the reason why the US Federal Bureau of Investigation called him
‘Unabom’, which stood for “University-and-airlines bomber”. The media
eventually named him Unabomber.

In 1995, he submitted a detailed premise for anarchy and his
philosophical complaint against the modern world, titled, ‘Industrial
Society and Its Future’ to the *New York Times* and *Washington Post*.
He threatened that if they did not run his 35,000-word piece, he would
kill more people. The papers decided to publish it in a collaboration.
It would appear in the *Washington Post* as an eight-page insert, and
the *Times* would share the cost of printing. It became an instant hit.

One reader of the essay called in to say that the style of prose and
ideas appeared to belong to his brother Theodore Kaczynski, a gifted
mathematician who became a recluse. Kaczynski turned out to be the
Unambomber. He spent the rest of his life in prison, watching the world
fare better than he had foretold. But then foretelling is where most
writers go wrong. His portrait of modern people, especially the
fellowship of do-gooders, struck many like a bolt.

On 10 June, he was found dead in his jail cell. He had killed himself,
but officials are yet to reveal how. He was 81.

Here I present some of the ideas from his essay, which was a call to
action to overthrow the entire “economic and technological basis of the
present society”. Very early in the piece, Kaczynski observed, “One of
the most widespread manifestations of the craziness of our world is
leftism, so a discussion of the psychology of leftism can serve as an
introduction to the discussion of the problems of modern society in
general.” He perceived “the left” as “a psychological type.” He focused
on “two psychological tendencies that underpin modern leftism.”

One of them was “feelings of inferiority,” such as “low self-esteem,
feelings of powerlessness, depressive tendencies, defeatism, guilt,
self-hatred, etc.” These feelings, he wrote, made leftists speak on
behalf of other underdogs whom they discreetly deemed as beneath them.
They did this not out of compassion as they claimed, but a subconscious
craving for power. “Leftists tend to hate anything that has an image of
being strong, good and successful… Art forms that appeal to modern
leftish intellectuals tend to focus on sordidness, defeat and despair…”

Apart from “feelings of inferiority”, the other defining trait of “the
left”, according to Kaczynski, was “oversocialization”.

‘Socialization’ is a formal term in psychology for the conditioning of
children to follow rules. So his description is puzzling at first glance
because “the left” does fight authority. He explained that society’s
moral codes are hard to follow. Most of us break these moral codes
through minor infractions. But some people are such conformists that
they need moral reasons to be nasty, like despising a group of people.
“In order to avoid feelings of guilt, they continually have to deceive
themselves about their own motives and find moral explanations for
feelings and actions that in reality have a non-moral origin.”

Kaczynski’s goal was to damage organized technology because it ruined
nature. At some point, he had grown disenchanted with industrial
addictions and wished to live at peace with nature, alone. But he had no
peace because the advanced world encroached on his way of life. This was
his true concern, and in his war against tech capitalism, he needed to
muster moral rage on behalf of workers.

His disdain for “the left” or organized empathy emerged from his
perception of it as a disease that infects and takes over all other
revolutions. But, as the left is a fellowship of group-think who tend to
ostracize those who do not agree with them, Kaczynski hoped that an
early declaration of hostility towards them would make them disown his
war, and he could then fight his battle without being appropriated by
that “psychological type”.

I waited till Kaczynski’s death to discuss his manifesto because any
other moment would have made it look like a tribute. I do not have a
problem with tributes, but it would make him look like the originator of
these thoughts. But the truth is that many of us arrived at some of his
ideas before reading him. In fact, he is powerful for the only reason
why any writer is—not because he is transformative, but because he has
corroborated your own thoughts.

Kaczynski’s lawyer advised him to plead insanity to escape a death
sentence. He refused, even though he had a good shot at being formally
declared insane. Kaczynski is a reminder that making immense sense is
not the same as sanity. Being mad is not about having some beliefs; it
is about doing something about them. Sanity, it turns out, is the
ability to do nothing much to further your convictions.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
