# A censor board for OTT platforms? Think again.

*2023-12-10*

In its obsession with treating Indians as children, India keeps coming
up with strange things. The latest is inside a policy draft released by
the ministry of information and broadcasting to seek public opinion. It
wishes to regulate streaming platforms like Netflix and cable networks
by forcing them to appoint “Content Evaluation Committees" that will
“certify" series and films on these platforms, a bit like how the Censor
Board approves films meant for theatrical release. These panels will
have “eminent individuals" as members, “representing different social
groups, including but not limited to women, child welfare, Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, minorities etc…"

This is a part of the government’s ongoing effort to regulate
entertainment. In 2021, it proposed a provision by which a film that has
already been certified by the censor board can be reviewed if a person
in the audience is offended. In a nation where it is a norm for people
to wait years for justice, this policy attempted to provide express
relief to those claiming to be offended, a group that can include
charlatans and extortionists. The dim idea was canned. I don’t know why;
its dimness is an unlikely reason. We always lament the bad things that
happen in India, but we should take time out to marvel at the mystery of
why some good things happen.

There have been other good developments. In 2021, through a list of
guidelines, the government accepted that there is nudity in art, that it
is okay, and that a 16-year-old’s life will not be ruined by the sight
of a naked body. The guidelines prescribed age-ratings and attempted to
create a system where thin-skinned Indians offended by content must
first approach the grievance committee of the platform instead of taking
the more entertaining route of police stations and courts. Still,
nothing stops people from filing criminal charges against a platform or
filmmakers, but at least the government thought of an alternative.

All major streaming platforms, including Jio, have objected to the
current effort to create censor boards for over-the-top (OTT) content,
and to other provisions in the policy draft. A person who was in the
same room when a major streaming platform and the government spoke told
me that platforms feel suffocated by this government’s loud and frequent
contemplation of how it wishes to control what is viewed. Apart from
censorship, what worries them is that three ministries are trying to
regulate them: the ministry of electronics and IT; the ministry of
information and broadcasting; and the ministry for communications.

The regression of India into a culturally sensitive society has already
affected the viewing experience of Indians. HBO Max, famed for its
quality content, had planned to enter India and produce local stories,
but the platform eventually dropped the plan. I am told by people in the
know that a part of the network’s reason was the fear that Indians are
too spoiled for choice and stingy to pay the right price for great fare.
But another major concern was the risk of censorship. Much of HBO’s
content requires not only a mature audience, but also mature governance.

What does the government want? It wishes to control what people watch.
We can pretend to be aghast, but I think it is somewhat natural for an
Indian government to do that. India seeks to exert two kinds of control.
Political and cultural. Political control can be exerted by trying to
rein in or influence the news media. Resistance might be valiant and
noble, but the Indian state probably holds most of the winning cards.
India’s cultural control, though, is a bit easier to resist. Why is this
distinction important?

India’s recent policies have clubbed news media and entertainment
channels as a monolith just because they qualify as online streaming
platforms. Maybe what the government is concerned about are activists
who tend to call themselves “independent media." To avoid looking like
China, which restricts journalism, India tends to club the news and
entertainment media together. So, among the first things that streaming
platforms should achieve is to get India to make a clear distinction
between facts and fiction, between journalism and a TV series. This is
important because measures that are aimed at news activism should not
suffocate entertainment in collateral damage. India does want to control
culture, and it also wants to empower those who are offended, but in my
view not as dearly as controlling news and activism.

What would I do if I were in the government and my pragmatic goal was to
control what is useful to me but let Indians prosper otherwise? I would
not suffocate entertainment. Already, in the world outside our screens,
in the real world, India is a boring place, a republic against fun. For
a country of this size, very few people visit it. Maybe the government
should get out of at least one form of entertainment.

The best way to control an industry is by letting its executives and
artists thrive. The more people have to lose, the more careful they
would be about not losing it all. People are usually slaves to their
prospects.

For entertainment to thrive, it needs to be free. When entertainment is
constricted, the sector gets filled with conformists and sidekicks and
those who specialize in safe bets. Already, streaming platforms all look
alike. As a result they fight on price, and Indians pay among the lowest
fees for streaming content. The fare on offer is not going to be
improved by a censor board of “eminent" people.
