# The future of our children who aren’t trained to suffer

*2023-09-03*

You may suspect that you have moved up the social rungs if you do not
know anyone who has made it to the Indian Institutes of Technology this
year, or to the Indian Administrative Service. Once, this hypothesis was
true only if you did not know a national-grade athlete personally, or a
person who can bowl faster than 130 kilometres per hour, or a
politician. There are some obvious reasons why this is so, but the most
influential is not that apparent.

A mainstream career is the creation of parental tyranny. Thus, a person
begins preparing “for life” in teenage sorrow, in dreary generational
training to go to some dreary hot small-town where there is somehow an
institution of excellence. But many parents today wish to be kinder. In
the urban upper middle-class and above, generally the target market for
air-fryers, parents are giving children the option of choosing enjoyable
paths to an uncertain future, probably leaving the next generation of
air-fryers in the hands of a very different social class. Homes that can
provide the best opportunities to their children to succeed in the most
competitive arenas are also the homes that give them a chance to opt out
of the most coveted fields. Among the beneficiaries of this act of
kindness are children who excel in maths and the sciences, including
boys. There are some children who adore the sciences, whose careers are
then sorted, but a majority who are good in these streams find them
terribly boring and wish to escape them. And their parents sponsor that.
So what will they do?

Some drift towards cooler branches of science. For instance, students
who in another era would have endured a decade of studying mainstream
medicine are now becoming marine biologists; those who would have
studied electrical engineering in another time are starting early in
rocket science. But, generally I think there are going to be more arts
graduates than before who will be telling us about the evils of
inequality. Even if students from air-fryer homes pick conventional
mainstream courses, they do not have the motivation to suffer the
rigours of the first phase of their career.

Most professions are tedious and boring, especially at the start. The
modern Indian student from an affluent family is not trained to endure
so much suffering, or the daily humiliations of a daily job. This
phenomenon was evident in the previous generations too, but then the
rich were very few and in those days only the rich behaved like the
rich. For instance, in my early twenties, I noticed that the posh crowd
of Madras who were transferred to Bombay could not take the city’s low
living standards for too long. They lasted just months; some just days.
They fled, seeing no point in enduring a second-rate life in the name of
a career. They chose to be in easier outposts than in the head office.
This form of quitting will be more rampant in the next generation,
especially in the air-fryer-home segment. They will be quitting before
they give themselves a chance to become so good at what they do that
they make their jobs interesting. That is the strange beauty of a
career; its foundations are dreary, the training is hard and terrible,
but then everything falls in place. If the young who have the potential
to become fine scientists, oncologists or civil engineers choose not to
realize their talents, what is to become of these fields? Their lack of
ambition will benefit others from more modest backgrounds, as is the
case today, but the fields would be impoverished in abstract ways. Just
as there are gems in the slums whom the world never knew because they
had no opportunity to shine; there are gems among the elite who had an
excess of choices to escape the arduous road to greatness.

For decades, science stole artists; now the arts are stealing potential
scientists. There is a view that a career is a flawed idea of the modern
world, that it makes clerks out of free beings. Whatever its flaws, it
is the best way in which the world pays people to get better and better
at what they do. And everything beautiful that people wish to do
requires years of repetition and training, most of it being drudgery
they can endure only if they are forced. That is why, the way I see the
lives of my peers, those who had to suffer the worst aspects of their
careers because they had to send money to their families were in the
long run luckier that the free who decayed in the rot of a good idle
life. In any case, no working person ever escapes a career. What the
freed children of today are hoping to pursue is a “an enjoyable career.”
They believe this involves “doing what you love.” This is possible, but
only for those who have exceptional talent. Those who are in the arts
with no special talent, or have nothing new to say can be assured of a
living hell. From what I have seen in the writing profession, many
people confuse their love for reading with an ability to write. In
reality, there cannot be two dissimilar things than reading and writing.
Yet here they are, cursed with enough family stipend to pursue their
delusions. If sports were a subjective field, it would be filled with
sprint-lovers trying to make a career out of running 100 metres in 20
seconds, and networking every night to be voted the best.

In their pursuit of “an enjoyable career” many air-fryer children will
find fake professions. If my generation is any indicator, they will find
professions that involve empathy, or they will do some abstract research
in a safe haven of intellectuality, or they will try to imitate their
peers and create “a startup.” All these lines of work do attract
exceptional talent, but, like the arts, they also help many pretend to
have a vocation.
