# India’s promotion of millets is great but will likely fail

*2023-02-05*

At one point during her presentation of India’s budget, finance minister
Nirmala Sitharaman praised millets as noble food. Prime Minister
Narendra Modi thumped the desk in approval and the rest of Parliament
joined the tribute as though all of them were eaters of these ancient
coarse grains.

Lately, India has been doing something uncharacteristically interesting.
It has been offering a health tip to Indians and the rest of the world.
It has been asking people to eat millets. The main motivation appears to
be to make more money off them, as India is their largest producer. But
the government also appears to truly believe millets are healthy. As it
is Indian nationalists think anything that is ancient is good for you.
So, millets are on their way to be canonized, like quinoa. The sainthood
of a food inevitably comes with some exaggerations, but all things
considered, millets deserve their late recognition. They are healthier
to consume than rice and wheat. This is also why millets are doomed.

Millets are grain. Like ‘vegetable’, ‘grain’ is not a botanical term.
From a scientific point of view, grains are the fruit of a type of
grass; they can also be considered seeds of grass or even one-seeded
fruits.

No matter what we eat, most of it becomes glucose in our stomach and
enters our bloodstream. Glucose is a simple form of sugar. The faster a
food becomes sugar, the more appealing it is to us. The commercial
success of any plant-based food is a measure of it as a sugar-delivery
device. That is why the most successful grains of our times are rice and
wheat. They triumphed chiefly because their modern varieties are tasty;
also, they can be consumed in polished, refined forms without the
inconvenience of chewing on a class of indigestible carbohydrates known
as fibre.

The modern world is a slave to sugar. There is no religion or tradition
or even mother’s love that can endure without sugar. People blame the
“sugar lobby” for their addiction, as if they would be eating boiled
cauliflower had there been a ‘boiled-cauliflower lobby’. The truth is
that the emotional human has very little defence against sugar.

The success of modern rice and wheat, which are good sugar-delivery
devices, has killed or diminished the lives of hundreds of millions of
people by injecting them with too much sugar. The two great grains have
been particularly devastating to people of certain genetic types, like
South Indians.

Compared to rice and wheat, millets turn into glucose inside us rather
slowly. This is also why they are considered healthy.

What is healthy eating has areas of sound scientific consensus and areas
of serious dispute. As a result, diets have many religions with their
own divinities and demons. I belong to a modern and sanctimonious creed
that does not know its god, but knows the name of the devil, which is
sugar.

After the stomach converts food into glucose and releases it into the
bloodstream, the pancreas release their most famous hormone—insulin,
which sends glucose to the cells for energy, reducing the sugar level in
the blood. But when a person releases a high amount of glucose into the
bloodstream many times a day for several years, flooding the body with
excess insulin, cells begin to defy the hormone and do not absorb as
much glucose as they are supposed to. The pancreas then send more
insulin, and this trains more cells to defy insulin even more. As a
result, many destructive things occur. Organs marinate in high blood
sugar for hours, which damages them; the excess sugar is eventually
converted into fatty acids and stored in the fat cells of various body
parts. Which parts of the body will accumulate fat is a lottery of human
genes.

The whole game of my creed is to slow the conversion of food into blood
sugar. Millets, like rice and wheat, have a high ratio of carbohydrates,
or stuff that can become glucose very fast. But among these
carbohydrates is a substance widely known as fibre. Rice and wheat, too,
have fibre but millets have more. And fibre slows the conversion of food
into glucose. I found the best description of the mechanism in the book
*Burn: The Misunderstood Science of Metabolism* by Herman Pontzer:
“Fiber from our food covers the intestinal walls like a wet knit
blanket, forming a lattice-like filter that slows the absorption of
sugars and other nutrients into the bloodstream. That is why the
glycemic index—the rush of sugar into the blood—is about 25 percent
higher for orange juice, which doesn’t have much fibre compared to a
piece of range, which does.”

Fibre also makes people eat less by quickly giving them a sense of
fullness. Also, generally, people like the taste of naked grains and
vegetables more than fibrous ones, another reason why they eat less of
what is fibrous. This is why I feel India’s promotion of millets will
not be much of a success. Millets are not as tasty as unhealthier forms
of food; and the world has always demonstrated that between taste and
health, people will talk more about what is healthy and then eat what is
tasty.

Millets actually face a crisis because the moment the poor can afford
other grains, they will probably abandon it. This is what the poor have
been doing for centuries. Abandoning these coarse grains. Millets will
survive, of course, but in a niche market.

In fact, the glorification of millets as a healthy alternative to rice
and wheat will inspire the broader market to corrupt these ancient
grains. For instance, the *ragi dosa* of the future will be more rice
and sugar than ragi. This is already the case in some restaurants. Every
time the world wants to pretend to be healthy, it ruins a part of my
life.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
