# Why a debate rages over whether ice-cream is healthy

*2023-05-21*

In April, a story emerged that for many years scientists have suppressed
an astonishing finding—that ice-cream might be good for health. The
Atlantic magazine ran a story headlined, ‘The Ice-cream conspiracy’ by
David Merritt Johns, who is generally described as a “public health
historian." His story begins in 2018. The research of a doctoral student
at Harvard Medical School led him to the conclusion that, “Among
diabetics, eating half a cup of ice cream a day was associated with a
lower risk of heart problems." The finding seemed so joyful, which is
rare in nutritional science, that his seniors asked him to check again.
But the health benefits of ice-cream survived all rigorous assaults.
Harvard downplayed the results.

That was not the first time a scientific study at Harvard linked
ice-cream to health benefits; 20 years earlier, researcher Mark A.
Pereira studied data from 1985 tracing the effect of food on the hearts
of over 5,000 young adults. Low-fat dairy, the data suggested, had a
good effect. It was interesting news at the time, but not surprising.
The shock was that low-fat dairy in the form of sweet dessert that
consisted “mainly of ice cream" had a much larger beneficial effect by
reducing the chances of overweight people turning pre-diabetic.

After The Atlantic’s story, a flood of stories appeared titled, in one
form or another, ‘Can ice cream be healthy?’ In journalism, if you see a
question as headline, it means the writer does not know the answer
because nobody does. These stories had the excitement of unspoken
hope—that ice cream is not only fine but beneficial, even if it is eaten
daily in small portions. Usually, something worth living for can also
kill you. But then the scientific community did not wish to admit this
was true. That was, in fact, the central message of The Atlantic
story—not that ice-cream might be beneficial, but that the hypothesis is
unpopular among nutrition scientists. It has been tested many times and
if any other food that did not contain sugar had accumulated this
quantum of evidence, it would have been popular wisdom by now. But
nutritionists and the media feel a sense of responsibility to play it
down. It is something a vast majority of people would want to believe.
But what if the science is wrong? The issue is similar to a finding that
nicotine is good—it is said to be a magic drug of nature, but what
people love is its delivery device, smoking, which can kill us with more
certainty than nicotine can extend our lives.

Johns mentions a study in 2014 that found “higher intake of yogurt is
associated with a reduced risk" for Type-2 diabetes, “whereas other
dairy foods and consumption of total dairy are not." One part of the
statement is not surprising. Yoghurt is a superhero among foods and no
one questions anything good said about it. But the other part is
intriguing. It was not true that the study found no other dairy food
that could reduce risk of diabetes. It had found that ice-cream did just
that. In fact, its good effect on one aspect of health was more
consistent than yoghurt’s. Imagine ice-cream being healthier than
yoghurt—some people might want to harm their parents.

Scientists wondered in what ways they can disprove ice-cream’s “health
benefits". The strongest lead they had was that nutritional research is
almost entirely based on what people said they ate and how much, and
people tend to lie. Scientists wondered what if in the cohort whose
statements form the basis of the 2014 study, those who developed
precursors to diabetes, like hypertension, had reduced their ice-cream
intake but did not report it, and healthy people saw no need to reduce
theirs? This would mean it was not ice-cream that made people healthy,
but good health sustaining or increasing its consumption. Researchers
tweaked the data to adjust for this. The health aura of ice-cream dimmed
by half, but even so, it appeared to be as healthy as yoghurt.

You may think all this is fine, but what is the truth? Is ice-cream
beneficial or not? Can it protect us from diabetes and heart disease?

There is something in ice-cream’s favour, but don’t stop reading yet. In
what most of us consider ‘real ice-cream’, the tastier stuff which is
made of dairy, there would be a “milk-fat-globule membrane" that sheaths
the fat. This membrane and the fat itself would ensure that the sugar in
it is released into the blood stream slowly. According to modern
nutrition, prevention of diabetes and heart disease is all about slowing
down that release. The rate at which food becomes blood sugar has a
standardized scale, the Glycemic Index. As Johns points out, ice-cream
has a lower index than brown rice. Also, ice-ream has vitamins and
protein.

But then, this is the sort of paragraph in mass media that conscientious
scientists dread. It is not factually wrong, but what if it inspires
people to make ice-cream their main course? Actually, a “Youtuber" did
just that, and he lost weight, but he started hating ice-cream after
that.

I am on the side of scientists who want to be absolutely certain before
they admit that ice-cream is healthier than we thought. Because, when it
comes to nutrition, science does not know enough. There could be an
unknown reason that influenced findings. Maybe those who don’t eat
ice-cream end up eating worse things. So, it is not that ice-cream is
healthy; it is that the modern world has invented worse junk.

But the most interesting revelation of the ice-cream conspiracy is that
even in science, we have gatekeepers who decide what should be canonized
as ‘proven fact’ and what should be defamed as a wrong signal.
