# A contest of two faulty arguments familiar to Indians

*2023-07-02*

The US Supreme Court has deemed it illegal for universities to practise
“affirmative action”, which is an American phrase for what Indians call
“reservations”. This is a part of the court’s war against discrimination
based on “race”, which is an American word for “caste”, and to assert
the US Constitution’s “colorblindness,” which is American idealistic
nonsense whose Indian equivalent is “secularism.” The verdict was split
with a majority of judges in favour of abolition and three dissents,
marking not the end of a war, but a historic moment in an eternal
political contest of two bad arguments.

The argument that triumphed is hinged on the view that ‘everyone is
equal’ in theory. The dissenting argument is based on the idea that
society should lower the bar for some people to help them catch up. One
argument is dear to people who venerate ‘merit’ because they
misunderstand their own luck for talent. Among the people who celebrated
the verdict was Donald Trump, who was born into wealth. He wrote,
“People with extraordinary ability and everything else necessary for
success, including future greatness for our Country, are finally being
rewarded…” This is almost exactly how many ‘upper castes’ in India would
react if the top court deems all quotas in educational institutions
illegal. There is an implication in this view that their success is a
result of their innate abilities. They think ‘merit’ begins at the start
of an entrance exam, and not in the cradle or earlier. What they cannot
see is that being born into the upper class is a system with a 100%
reservation for its own. Just look what happened in some spheres of life
when a broad section of Indians got some opportunities. There was a time
when it seemed only upper castes could crack the Joint Entrance Exam of
the Indian Institutes of Technology, or even have the right technique to
be batsmen. All that has changed.

The other argument, the one that lost, is more humane and like all
humane arguments about equality it is dear to people who are
beneficiaries of inequality. It is also dear to people of a race or
caste or group that is perceived as the “underclass”. Especially the
elite among them, who are in the best position to gain from affirmative
action. They appropriate the trauma of their people, even though they
themselves are privileged. When a society lowers the bar to help victims
of historical injustice, the people who benefit the most from are not
weakest in the group, but the best off.

I do not say that African-Americans who benefited from affirmative
action were all affluent, but I do say that they were, in their own ways
luckier than most of their community. Even to work hard and succeed, you
need to come from the right home. There are African-Americans who got
college admission “on merit” as Indians would call it. They endure the
discomfort of being perceived as unfairly selected. This is among the
arguments that conservatives have presented to abolish affirmative
action. It is not that their hearts ache for “meritorious”
African-Americans, but because arguments need moral facades.

Michelle Obama issued a statement on the verdict that tried to remind us
she entered Princeton and Harvard not because of quotas, but because she
had “worked hard” for it; “…I sometimes wondered if people thought I got
there because of affirmative action. It was a shadow that students like
me couldn’t shake, whether those doubts came from the outside or inside
our own minds.” She considers affirmative action essential, though,
despite some of its problems. Her husband Barack Obama reacted
similarly: “Affirmative action was never a complete answer in the drive
towards a more just society. But for generations of students who had
been systematically excluded from most of America’s key institutions—it
gave us the chance to show we more than deserved a seat at the table.”

The problem with affirmative action is that it has not realized its
goals; it has not liberated most African-Americans. So why have a policy
that gives to privileged African-Americans what it takes from privileged
Caucasians?

If both the arguments on affirmative action are flawed, then what is the
solution to the fact that some people having an unfair head-start over
the rest?

Much strife in the modern world emerges from constricted paths to
economic well-being. What you love doing or what you’re very good at is
usually not lucrative. Most entrepreneurs, artists and athletes fail to
make a good living. A more certain path to a decent life is corporate
bureaucracy, whose doors are guarded by a club that demands “quality
education” for entry. So the consecration of higher education is not
only a fake solution to social problems, but also a creator of new forms
of inequality. It is a club that wishes to broaden the diversity of its
snobs by luring people to imitate straight Caucasian males.

There will always be inequality because that is the instinctive
objective of individual ambition. The central aim of a typical family is
to provide an unfair advantage to the family’s children. Economic
inequality is far less unnatural than people think. Social equality,
which means the rich pretending everyone is equal, is possible because
mass acting is not hard to achieve.

An ideal society would not waste its time trying to end inequality.
Instead, it would try to establish a compassionate government that makes
a high quality of life inexpensive for everyone, with only things like a
seat in a carbon-fibre submarine that are left unaffordable.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
