# Why psychoanalysis should be kept outside one’s home

*2023-09-17*

Home psychoanalysis is a modern disorder. More than ever, people are
attributing reasons for a person’s behaviour to something not very
obvious, like the distant past or sexual melancholy or the subconscious
mind. Thus there are claims that a man does not prioritize his family
because he had a bad childhood; or that a woman is unhappy in a
relationship because she entered it “on the rebound”; or that a child is
scared of birds because she once had a frightening toy, and so on. And
there are interpretations of dreams where serpents mean sex and public
nudity means a sense of inferiority. (A search for meaning in dreams is
close to the origins of psychoanalysis—in Sigmund Freud’s fanciful
interpretations.) And, of course, people also read “body language”:
folded arms are a defensive pose and a rub of the nose signifies lying.

It is hard to dispute that the subconscious mind exists, and that it
dictates behaviour. The collective subconscious mind of society is even
perceivable, but the mainstream view that the individual subconscious
can be read using general cues that hold good for all minds and that
such an analysis is a settled science is a marketing triumph of
psychoanalysis. The internet has accelerated the transmission of
psychoanalytical cues and labels, inserting them into how people think
about others.

As recently as a century ago, people did not psychoanalyse much, or at
all, as we can deduce from literature that is available to us from many
parts of the world. In the Bible, or the great Indian, Greek or Arabic
epics, for instance, characters do not perceive an esoteric cause of an
effect. Even dreams are only supernatural instructions and not omens of
a secret personality. But after Freud grew popular and gave academic
sophistication to the religious idea that dreams are allegories, the
subconscious assumed the reputation of being our true self, with our
public persona a facade. We have never been more unfair to those who
love us.

Most people have not read Freud; they are merely under the influence of
his insight, which is that we appear to do one thing but something else
is going on with us. The actual transmission of psychoanalysis was done
by writers. A literary novel, for instance, is almost entirely about
what is going on in a character’s mind. And often what is going on is a
psychoanalysis of others. Take for instance a strand from The Unbearable
Lightness of Being by Milan Kundera. In the novel, a beautiful young
woman named Tereza has the habit of studying herself in the mirror. The
reason, Kundera says, is that Tereza’s competitive mother had made the
girl feel unattractive for years, and now she is liberated. “Now we can
better understand the meaning of Tereza’s secret vice, her long looks
and frequent glances in the mirror. It was a battle with her mother. It
was a longing to be a body unlike other bodies, to find that the surface
of her face reflected the crew of the soul charging up from below.”

She is just a young woman checking herself out. Is that so unusual? But
then, Tereza is a creation of Kundera, so his psychoanalysis of her
cannot be wrong. However, the passage conveys how writers may have
infected the world with psychoanalysis, which is often an over-analysis.
It approximates how modern people who believe they are ‘perceptive’
think about others, how they unearth delicious connections and how they
enjoy the satisfying click of a theory fitting an observation. If Tereza
were a real person with a bitter mother, it is highly likely that her
long gazes into the mirror would have no deep reason. Also, it is likely
that her bad childhood had not adversely affected her at all. This is a
point that is hard for many to accept because they are more steeped in
psychoanalysis than they know. But in a world addled by psychoanalysis,
which came to us first as a pseudoscience, and then as a new way of
storytelling, the people around the real Tereza who rate themselves as
‘thinkers’ or as ‘sensitive’ would find meanings in almost everything
she did, just as the lover of the fictional Tereza overthinks her rather
ordinary vanity.

Today, the influence of psychoanalysis is more direct. There is TikTok
psychoanalysis and self-improvement reels on Instagram. The world is
suddenly awash in labels, with men who are ‘gaslighting’ and
relationships that are ‘toxic,’ and events that are ‘triggering,’ and
homes that are ‘dysfunctional,’ and pasts that are ‘traumatic’ and
situations that cause ‘panic attacks.’ Some old metaphors, too, have
returned, like ‘demons.’ There is no greater sign of psychoanalytical
farce today than when people claim they are “fighting their own demons.”

Literature gives an idea of what is going on. Psychoanalysis is at the
core of modern literature, but a lot of it is sham even in fine novels.
But then there are moments of great insight. In Unbearable Lightness...,
Kundera is impressive when he writes how we are torn between gravitas
and lightness, the heaviness of love, and the lightness of freedom.
Psychoanalysis has some moments of greatness, but mostly it sees too
much.

Some people have an intuitive ability to look deep into human nature and
see hidden meanings in actions, or to realize there might be no special
meanings. Most people do not have that gift, yet they make forays into
the minds of others by consulting a spurious map.

It is alright to get an analysis of the Prime Minister or Elon Musk
wrong, but people who are more important in our lives do not deserve
home psychoanalysis.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
