# The value of those who keep losing to Narendra Modi

*2023-03-05*

What is the relevance of ‘good guys’ who always lose? What is the
purpose of people who stand for harmony, equality and freedom, but
cannot draw the support of citizens who, too, want harmony equality and
freedom? What is the point of an activist who speaks to the masses when
the masses do the exact opposite of what he asks them to do? In a
democracy, what is the meaning of public rejection?

On Friday, we learnt that the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has expanded
its influence over the Northeast after winning two states there and
being very much in the game in another. Next year, the party is expected
to win India’s general elections easily, even after a decade in power.
And it is set to dominate politics for many more years, especially at
the Centre. How should we view the people who have been fighting the
BJP? What is the point of their existence? This may sound like an
insult, but that is not my intention. In fact, I am trying to arrive at
their value to us. I am not referring to professional politicians, like
Rahul Gandhi alone. I am chiefly talking about the long tail of politics
that is not called politics. Idealists, journalists who have not sold
out to the BJP, poets, developmental economists, humanities scholars and
writers with a moral compass. They have raged against the BJP and
portrayed its leaders as hardline Hindus who oppress other religions.
Yet, Nagaland, with a nearly 90% Christian population, has voted for the
BJP. The intellectual resistance to the BJP has portrayed it as a party
that is in cahoots with billionaires, yet the poor vote for the party.
(Time and again, what the poor demonstrate is that between the rich and
the posh, they despise the posh more.)

The fact that those who stand for the finest human virtues lose against
the BJP does not mean that the people of India have no respect for those
virtues. Most humans hold the same set of virtues dear, but the
hierarchy in which they are held at any point in time is what sets us
apart. At the moment, most Indians are at a stage where they wish for
swift prosperity more than a sense of harmonious unity with the rest of
India. But this does not mean they are dismissive of unity or even the
well-being of other people.

So that is the relevance ‘good guys’ have. They are conservationists of
a society’s best qualities; they ensure that just because some virtues
are not influential anymore, they do not slide further down the ranks of
relevance. In that way, they reassure those who fear the BJP that what
matters to them is not entirely irrelevant. It is a voice that can
emerge only from defeat.

But shouldn’t human virtues have better champions, people who know how
to defeat the practical types? Not only do the ‘good guys’ of India not
know how to win, they also do not retire; they persist in their doomed
fight because they have nothing else to do and they ensure that more
talented activists with more potent fights in them do not rise.

To understand the true value of idealists, it is useful to assess not
the worst and mediocre among them, but the finest. So let us consider
Ravish Kumar, a journalist and activist whose Hindi is exquisite and his
calm son-of-the-soil lament is the very voice of India’s conscience. He
is the reminder that Indians whose dominant language is their
mother-tongue are at a different level of articulation than Indians who
have been muddled by English.

The arguments that Ravish makes do not win elections. And his
overarching argument that the BJP is bad for the nation is something
that people periodically reject. Yet, Ravish is extremely popular. A few
times, when I have thought that a group of drivers under a tree are
watching a Hindi film, it has turned out that they are watching a clip
of Ravish. I have heard Ravish’s voice in this manner from passers-by.
Never have I heard anyone listen to Prime Minister’s podcast, ‘Mann Ki
Baat’. I know this is all anecdotal, but I believe intuitively that
Ravish’s monologues are more popular than Modi’s. Without a doubt, Modi
is many times more popular, and he would demonstrate so if ever there is
a vote. But voting is not all that people do. There are some healthy
things Indians do and listening to the voices of their nation’s
conscience may be among them.

Many ideological foes of the BJP do not accept that they are defeated.
They feel that as long as they persist, they are not defeated. This is
merely wall-poster-grade philosophy. Often persistence is just the
doomed Plan-A of people with no Plan-B. It is hope, which is a form of
sorrow and a conversation with the self. Also, the idea that their
persistence will sow the seeds of a spectacular victory against the BJP
many years later is a fallacy. The BJP will, of course, lose in the
future, but that would not be because of the persistence of losers, but
because of internal turmoil, as the Congress party’s decline has shown.

The charm of Ravish is in his state of defeat. He accepts that all
resistance to the BJP is futile in the near future, and that nothing he
says or reports will change that. In that way, his work is art, because
art is the pathos of the underdog. This is also why Modi’s poetry, in
his own observation, is probably not high art. In his poems, he is a
kite, soaring with “the grace of the sky”, towards the sun, held back
“only by the string”, or “an ocean that leaps with energy”, or a man who
is as “upright as a mountain” and as “pure as the river”. Ravish, on the
other hand, speaks of the melancholy of defeat. That is the core
constituency of art, and people are drawn to art even when they don’t
know it is art. I can’t prove it, but I think many people who vote for
Modi enjoy the melancholy dispatches of Ravish.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
