# It’s a wonder what most Indian politicians actually do

*2023-01-22*

One of the worst things about dying in India is the poor quality of
obituaries. Most tributes termed Yadav a “socialist leader". What does
it mean? Nothing. Among meaningless words in Indian political reporting,
‘socialist’ is on par with ‘secularist’.

Yadav was a successful man, of course. Yet, obituaries struggled to
explain what he did for other people. His two remarkable feats are that
he became a Member of Parliament at the age of 27 and years later
contributed to the political pressure that forced V.P. Singh as prime
minister to adopt recommendations of the Mandal Commission, which opened
reservations for a broad band of Indians, thereby defeating the whole
point of quotas.

**You might also like **

India’s rupee trade bid and the math behind it

How GST brought cheer to some states, not others

RBI to appeal HC order on Yes Bank AT-1 bonds

How a non-compete clause pushed Roongta to RIA practice

It is likely that what Yadav did most of his life was what most
politicians, successful or not, did most of their lives. He indulged in
politics, which is a mixture of deal-making, lobbying, cobbling
alliances, compromising and plotting to win elections. He was caught up
in the process of politics. This differs from the formal objective of
politics, which is to improve the lives of a huge number of people.

My argument is not that Yadav achieved nothing. It is that in the 20,000
odd days he was a politician, most of them were spent in politicking,
which is merely a process. I would have said that this occupied all his
political life, but I am not counting the few days when he won polls,
gave speeches that influenced people or policy.

Indian politicians are usually entrapped in the political process, which
keeps them away from the point of politics. Politics claims it is a
means to an end, but most politicians operate entirely in the means.
This condition exists in the democratic aspects of all professions,
where lobbying and arguments impede actual work.

Politicking has a sense of direction and gravitas because of its
objective, which is to transform society, but politicians spend very
little time on the transformation part. An overwhelming majority of
politicians do not do anything useful for society. In fact, if it were
not for the harm they cause, their professional lives would have been
entirely without any impact. Imagine a profession where players raise
funds to make a movie, forge alliances to raise funds, plot ways to go
about it, analyse what would make the cinema project work, but never
actually make the film, nor spend even a minute attempting to do so.

Lalu Prasad issued a statement from Singapore where he was recuperating
from an operation. He had nothing to say about Yadav’s accomplishments.
Instead he said, "Sharad Yadav and I fought with each other, but our
disagreements never led to any bitterness." It captured the essence of
their relationship, which was probably more about politicking than doing
anything for society.

At first glance, it may seem improbable that Jacinda Ardern can confirm
any aspect of Sharad Yadav’s political life. To be the prime minister of
New Zealand has to one of the most fulfilling jobs in politics. Every
moment, she is the face of her nation and an ambassador of an ideal;
that alone makes it a proper morally defensible job. Yet, on Thursday,
she announced that she will not run for office and would rather focus on
her family life. She said one cannot do her job, “unless you have a full
tank, plus, a bit in reserve for those unexpected challenges… I am not
leaving because it was hard. Had that been the case, I probably would
have departed two months into the job… I am leaving because with such a
privileged role, comes responsibility. The responsibility to know when
you are the right person to lead, and also, when you are not."

I do not believe that Ardern quit as PM because she was tired of making
a difference to New Zealand. What she was saying is that she is tired of
politics, the endless process of carrying key allies and foes with you,
watching your back, plotting your moves, and so on, which takes up all
of one’s energy before the moral objective of politics even comes into
the picture.

The rot where people are stuck in the means and have no energy or
interest in achieving ends can be seen in other professions, too.
Consider India’s top activists, the activists you know, whom you have
read or watched on TV news. What have they achieved? What have they
changed? What have they won? Nothing really. They wallow in the
intoxication of televised performances, ensconced in the means for years
without any interest in achieving the objective of activism.

Some may argue that progress is not all there is to politics. Life is
not only about better roads, clean air and prosperity. A society is also
about grouses. Classical politicking politicians reassure large
communities that they will not be superseded by other communities. And
there is value in this. That is why Indians have rewarded cultural
guardians. The politicking politician is the creation of the politicking
Indian.

This is why every now and then, we see images of people in Mumbai
commuting; hordes trying to get inside a compartment where there are
already hundreds of people. This has been their plight for decades. Many
political revolutions have come and gone in India, generations of
politicking has taken place, without figuring out a way to shut the
doors of Mumbai’s suburban trains.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, CM Eknath Shinde writes* *Mahrashtra was a magnet for
investment* *MoUs at Davos. L. Viswanathan & Madhav Kanoria explain how
govt's proposals will* *strengthen insolvency code. Long Story tells*
*how to explain the budget to your grandma.*
