# What could possibly ruin the BJP’s dominance one day

*2023-09-24*

It appears that many politicians across India who are not with the
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) live in fear of imprisonment, chiefly for
corruption or old crimes. It is odd because, until recently, it was
uncommon for politicians in India to be so vulnerable to the justice
system. They were protected by an unspoken code. To the extent it was
possible, politicians in power guarded their own kind, including the
ones not in power. Some did end up in jail. Current home minister Amit
Shah was imprisoned in 2010. But those were anomalies in the system.
Shah’s tremendous rise explains why. Power is temporary; powerlessness
is temporary. Politicians needed to have each other’s back. So what has
changed now? Under BJP rule, that code of professional courtesy has
vanished.

The reason, I believe, is that the party is so confident of being in
power at the centre for the next “30-40 years,” as Shah put it, that the
benefits of radiating fear outweigh the risks of breaking a shadowy old
code. For the top rung of the BJP, antagonizing other politicians is not
a high-stakes gambit.

The BJP is mighty. Even in Karnataka, where it lost elections, it did
not lose its voter base; it gained urban voters. As things stand, it is
hard to see how the party can lose the general elections next year. It
is pragmatic and led by a superstar. Indians may not adore Narendra Modi
the way Tamilians loved M.G. Ramachandran, because Indians are not so
naive anymore, but Modi is a bigger draw at the polls in many parts of
India than MGR ever was in one.

But the end will come for the BJP one day because that is the way of the
world. And when it comes, what would be the reason? What could destroy
the BJP’s dominance in the future? There would appear to be a host of
reasons, but reasons are never equal. It is always a single cause that
has an outsized impact on an outcome. What could it be?

An obvious cause would be the departure of Modi from politics. The party
surely does have a secret succession plan, but that cannot save it from
the curse of the second-best—a phenomenon where strong satraps fight for
the throne but no single person can vanquish everyone else, and a weaker
leader is hoisted to the top as everyone’s second-best idea. This has
been the curse of the Congress party after the demise of Rajiv Gandhi.

The success of Modi’s BJP in part emerges from the fact that he was not
the second-best candidate at the time of his ascent. After the party was
rattled by a major defeat, the strongest politician in the next
generation asked the old lot to fade away, and he quickly become the
party’s mascot.

After Modi, it is highly likely that the BJP’s chieftains in the second
rung, all equals, will squabble over who should take over. The party
would then succumb to the most phoney political ideal in India—that we
are “not a presidential system,” that a party need not pitch a prime
ministerial face for elections, that the prime minister should be chosen
after the results are in. This has been the doom of the Congress, and
will likely be the doom of the alliance that is forming against Modi for
2024, and could also be the doom of the BJP after Modi.

But can confusion over leadership alone ruin the BJP ? What about the
fact that the BJP represents the modern average Indian, even in the
south, in a way no other party does. But then, the Hinduness of the BJP
may cease to be special in the future because every party that matters
would have a Hindu hue, like the Aam Aadmi Party today does.

The transformation of India from a farcical ‘secular’ republic in theory
into a melodramatic Hindu nation in practice hides a weird quality of
BJP politics. Hindus do not have real grievances anymore. The BJP has
created the world’s only nation where the majority behaves like a
wounded minority. That is hard to sustain. The cultural war is over and
Hindu dominance has won. There are no open wounds anymore. Already,
issues like this-mosque-was-a-temple-once or that-artefact-is-an-idol do
not gather political momentum.

When there is this political entropy, and every party is somewhat Hindu
in its politics, and the BJP is left without a superstar and is headed
by its second-best, the party might splinter. Even if it does not break
up, a shock, like a major economic crisis or a pandemic, could upset the
middle classes and youth, who would then suddenly find moral reasons to
vote the party out of power. People live with a sense of failure and
every decade or so, they need to blame it on politics. How long can the
BJP escape that?

These factors that may ruin the BJP’s run presume that there would be
professional political figures who would be able to exploit the
scenario. But very often, what trounces a giant is an amateur with an
amateurish idea. Like a fabulous orator who says he has had enough. Of
what, we do not know. At any point in civilization, someone has to just
say he has “had enough” and everyone appears to get it. Assume that this
someone forms a ‘10-year-party’ which promises that after ten years of
fixing the nation, it would be dissolved and none of its members will
contest elections again, exhibiting a supreme sacrifice of power which
Indians so love.

If this sounds far-fetched, that is the point. An amateur idea evolves
in unexpected ways because its prophet is not professional enough to
know it is far-fetched. At the peak of the anti-corruption movement,
Anna Hazare wanted a fellowship to police elected politicians, a
fellowship of unelected people whose qualification was that they had won
a Filipino award called the Magsaysay.
