# Why it takes high talent to produce middlebrow work

*2023-03-19*

There are no spoilers in the next line. In *The Last of Us*, the hit HBO
web series, most of humanity dies in a fungi pandemic. The fungus takes
over the brains of the infected, and manipulates them to attack and bite
the healthy, who then become infected in a matter of minutes or hours or
longer, there is no telling. Then, they too turn into rabid undead
mushrooms. I know I should have just said it is a zombie story. But I
was reaching out to some of you who may be infected by snobbery. Even
though we will never be friends, I did not want you to deny yourself
this series, which belongs to a broad class of storytelling that
requires real artistic talent—the middlebrow.

What is considered highbrow is usually a product of self-absorption and
narcissism, even when it is pure and really good. A highly networked
megalomaniac with limited talent but a powerful personal experience or
mental ailment can achieve highbrow. Its unspoken claim that true art is
primarily anthropology and not entertainment is bogus. People who scoff
at entertainment are usually people who are incapable of entertainment.
Highbrow can be exquisite, but most of it is boring and designed to be
extolled by the intellectually frail who wish to hide the fact. Lowbrow,
on the other hand, is a gamble of merchants on what they think most
people would enjoy. At the heart of the lowbrow is the notion that
serious artistic talent is the enemy of entertainment. Yet, despite
going by ‘what people want’, a large proportion of lowbrow creations
fail, as bets tend to.

Middlebrow is art that reaches out. Its clarity is in its desire to
succeed. Through entertainment, it attempts to win the right to say what
might not be entertaining. It is hard to create. In comparison, the
purity of highbrow is facile. Anyone can write a dense unreadable book
about his mama’s dreams.

It is the middlebrow that requires talent. In its bid to be commercially
successful, it does not aim to be extraordinary in every frame. What a
good middlebrow work has is islands of excellence in an ocean of
familiar tropes.

I am aware that terms like ‘highbrow’ and ‘middlebrow’ are abstract and
subjective. What is highbrow to some might be middlebrow to others, and
so on. When I first read Salman Rushdie’s *Midnight’s Children*, I was
around 16 and I thought it was highbrow. Not anymore. Also, from a
metaphorical point of view, only ‘highbrow’ makes sense because humans
cannot or do not make their eyebrows ‘low’ or ‘middle’. Even if they
did, they will not convey what the terms hope to. Middlebrow and lowbrow
are derived from highbrow and are substandard metaphors. Even so, the
creative works they represent are real. You may not agree with what I
consider middlebrow, but that does not stop me from persuading you that
semi-commercial-art is the greatest form of art.

I can, though, pass on a reasonable definition of the middlebrow. It is
something that needs word-of-mouth to succeed. That is why the
persistence and survival of the middlebrow is a triumph of fun-loving
people, who are its patrons and evangelists. Review journalism and the
acclaim industry usually do not celebrate the middlebrow. In India,
especially, you will find more fuss around dull “issue-based” or
“important” works than entertaining films and books. A middlebrow work
of quality has to be familiar and cliched, but also have a reason to
exist. The problem it must solve is how it can still surprise you.
Everything that can be said has been already; there are no more new
stories, or even characters. Audiences know all the tropes. Yet, they
need to be startled.

*The Last of Us*, an adaptation of a video game, does that. In the
process, this series exposes the ‘genre’ of a story as nonsense. Broad
classifications like ‘comedy’ and ‘horror’ may be practical, but,
generally, most labels that stories are given, like ‘literary fiction’
and ‘coming-of-age’, are marketing rubbish. In *The Last of Us*, which
is a ‘zombie film’, there are episodes where you do not see a single
zombie. Its science is more persuasive than the theories in
*Interstellar*. One episode, which appears early, is almost entirely the
love story of a gay couple.

I have never seen a bad zombie movie. That is probably because I have
seen only five, including Michael Jackson’s famous *Thriller* music
video. *Zombieland, World War Z* and *I Am Legend* were, like *The Last
of Us*, better experiences than many “important” issue-based hours of
drudgery I have suffered.

Good writers almost never write a story for the sake of the story. The
origin is always something else, and the story then becomes a device to
contain that purpose, which could be to show us a character, or to mine
an emotion. Sometimes, what you really want to say does not need the
whole expanse of a film or a book. When I think of the relationship
between a story and the point of telling the story, I am often reminded
of the zeppelin. Most of this old air-ship’s volume is just air, but its
whole point is the tiny gondola where its passengers sit. In a
middlebrow work, the story occupies disproportionate space, but the
reason for its existence is that little thing that the eye may miss.

The most interesting element in *The Last of Us* is the interaction
between its two central characters, a violent alpha male and an orphaned
teenager (not that the alpha is not orphaned). It is possible that the
whole purpose of the series was a writer’s attempt to portray a
father-daughter relationship. If so, to embed it in a zombie story was a
masterstroke. I would say if you have anything to say at all, anything
important and dense, and complex, and thus with no market value, just
frame it as a zombie story.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
