# Awful arguments were made against demonetization

*2023-01-08*

One evening in 2016, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi said
high-denomination notes, or 86% of India’s cash in circulation, would be
cancelled overnight. The official objective was to shock and impoverish
hoarders. All Indians could return old notes to banks. The government
expected hoarders of illegally earned cash not to do so and reveal
themselves. Eventually, the Reserve Bank of India said that 99% of the
old cancelled cash was returned to banks. And an argument grew that
demonetization was a colossal failure because almost all the cancelled
money was turned in. This is one of the worst arguments ever.

**You might also like **

What will be the math behind Budget 2023?

Reliance Capital lenders plan round 2 of auction

The worst may be over for emerging markets

E-scooter maker Ather Energy sets $1 bn revenue target

Demonetization was, of course, a nightmare, and there could be sound
arguments that establish why it failed to achieve its objectives, but
the evidence is not in the 99% of notes returned.

Of course, the cash was returned, by both criminals and regular people,
but the process was not the same for both. Hoarders of illicit cash had
to offload money at a substantial loss. They gave cash at huge discounts
to those willing to absorb their stash from them. According to some
stories I heard, hoarders got only <span class="webrupee">₹</span>500’s
worth for every <span class="webrupee">₹</span>1,000 they got rid of.
Cash launderers then deposited it in bank accounts that were too modest
to attract attention. So it is not surprising that most of the illicit
cash, divided into smaller tranches, went back into banks. As long as
people were not burning cash, the notes were destined to go back in.

An unknowable quantity of counterfeit currency, and here I am not
referring to the meagre number of fake notes that were detected, was
surely obliterated. The return of 99% of once-legal tender does not
reflect the mass disappearance of counterfeit notes.

The second bad argument associated with demonetization is that the
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) survived demonetization because of the
popularity of Narendra Modi. As we know, the party and Modi not only
survived the disastrous effects of demonetization, but also thrived. We
forget how incredible that feat was. Indians could not access their own
money for many days; and the economy visibly shrank. Yet, Modi and the
BJP won over a dozen elections at various levels in the months that
followed. If the truth of demonetization was everything that the
critical media reported, what explained the party’s success? An argument
grew that it was because Indians had grown enamoured of the Prime
Minister.

Modi’s popularity was perhaps at its peak at the time, and this may have
helped in the first few days of demonetization. It does not explain why
the BJP won polls across India for months afterwards.

The fact is, the poor and others who are ‘average’ in other ways had
exaggerated respect for the idea of demonetization when it was
implemented. They suffered, but they did see the point of it. Their own
reasoning might have been faulty, but it is simply not true that they
suffered in silence and mysteriously went in droves to vote for Modi and
his party again and again. It does not make sense.

Rather, what likely happened was that the poor thought, even many months
after the event, that it was an attack on the country’s rich.
Intellectuals pointed to long lines of middle-class people outside ATMs
and asked where the rich were in those queues; surely the poor can see
that? Actually, the poor saw the rich stand in queues for cash, and the
‘rich’ were us.

The poor do not distinguish between people who own Skodas and people who
own Mercs —they are all the same, the rich, and the rich were visibly
brought to their knees outside ATMs. So Modi’s popularity survived not
because of blind adulation of him, but because of wide resentment for
people like us, direct employers of the poor. The poor did suffer more
than us, as they normally do in any calamity, but they were probably
consumed by the reasoning that if they suffered so much, the rich, who
had more money, would be suffering more.

The third bad argument, which has also endured, is that every single
aspect of demonetization was a failure.

Demonetization, before India implemented it in the worst possible way in
2016, was a somewhat respectable clean-up idea. In fact, people forget
that in 2010, when the anti-corruption movement entered its spiritual
phase, Baba Ramdev, who had joined the scene, publicly called for the
cancellation of high-denomination notes. This proposal seemed
interesting for a few days before it was forgotten. I have a theory, by
the way, that Baba Ramdev’s pronouncements have served the BJP as test
balloons for impending policies.

Demonetization destroyed the confidence Indians had in hoarding cash,
especially illicit cash. I had thought at the time that the confidence
in illicit cash would be destroyed forever, transforming how real estate
is bought and corruption is conducted in India. I might have been wrong
about that sort of impact. Still, I do not accept the view that the
illicit cash system is as robust today as it was before demonetization.
Illicit cash is largely back, but not the way it was before.

Demonetization did point out to India, in an unforgettable way, that
operating with cash is risky.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series*, ‘Decoupled’.

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Kaushik Basu argues India should propose a* *G Minor at the
G20. Diva Jain says* *news of industrial policy’s demise* *was vastly
exaggerated. In Long Story,  Minister of State for IT* *Rajeev
Chandrasekhar clears misconceptions* *surrounding a slew of pivotal
digital legislation.*
