# The world and even India have left Mumbai far behind

*2023-05-28*

About eight years ago when the first Mumbai Metro line opened, the
passengers gawked like ancient rustics at the swanky air-conditioned
cars, and the automatic doors. It was all so new to them. Purely from
their reactions, they did not look like residents of one of the largest
urban economies of the world.

This January, two more sections of two more metro lines opened, and the
reactions of the people were the same because the people of Mumbai are
still not used to what is basic infrastructure not only in the urban
world but also in urban India. Most of Mumbai still travels in humid
trains that cannot be air-conditioned because commuters spill out of the
cars, dangling all the way, some of them falling to their deaths almost
every day. In fact, most of Mumbai is not used to air-conditioned public
buses or even taxis. Its traffic congestion today is among the worst in
the world because it does not have enough roads. It is only now that
some infrastructural projects are nearing completion, or starting.

This was once a great city, but has regressed so much that today, even
by Asian standards, it is merely a small town with a lot of people in
it. Even in the form of modern urban entertainment, it has nothing
beyond food. Yes, women are generally safer on the roads, if you do not
count the New Year’s eve.

Life was, for long, hard in the city. It was always a gigantic urban
design flaw. But, like most great cities, it had a right to make you
suffer. Because it offered something in return. There was an unspoken
agreement between “Bombay" as it was called once, and its people,
especially its new people. In return for its flaws, Bombay offered a way
of life that was not available anywhere else in India or in many parts
of the world.

If you consider the great cities of the world like New York or even
Shanghai and Bangkok, they do compress space and suffocate, but in
return they offer the joy of a modern city that is unique in the world
or at least in the region. In that way, there is meaning to the
congestion. People flock to a city in large numbers, or remain, for a
reason. Mumbai offers nothing unique anymore. Not even higher pay when
compared to other big Indian cities.

I was 21 when I moved to Bombay and by my first evening I accepted that
my home would be a debasing place. But in all other ways, life in the
city was better than the places that raised me, and that was not only
because I was single. Bombay, in the mid-90s was still many notches
above any other Indian city. It had uninterrupted electricity supply,
which was a novel experience for an Indian. Even though it did not have
a great road-length, its traffic congestion was less than in Madras. I
saw concrete roads for the first time. There were several bars, and
night clubs. The girls were, to borrow an expression from Madras,
“broad-minded". India was and is a republic against fun, but Bombay was
not. In important ways, Bombay was not even India. There were the sort
of people here whom you could not find anywhere else. The cultural elite
and patrons of art were distinct.

All the wondrous things the world was inventing then came to India
through Bombay first. The mobile and internet coverage was the best in
India. The stray dogs, too, were large, well-fed and happier than
anywhere else in the nation. Except for space, there was abundance.

Yet, even then it was not hard to see that Bombay was deteriorating from
the time when the self-interest of the British, Parsis and Gujaratis
created it. Bombay was a city that had a shot at greatness. But then it
was impoverished by petty men who did not have the vision even to be
corrupt in a grand way. The people of modern Mumbai are like children
from wealthy families who have been abducted by a syndicate of beggars,
their genetic destiny altered into a third-rate life. Mumbai is an
abduction, from our own rightful destiny.

Today, Mumbai offers nothing that other big cities don’t. Even its
identity as “financial capital" is obsolete. What does the term even
mean anymore? The biggest myth of the city even in its better days is
the notion that everyone here is terribly busy with some important
thing. You make a guy run behind a train, he will look busy. There is
nothing more to it. It is just a mirage of urban preoccupation. What is
left of Mumbai is only its suffocation and the petty sizes of homes. It
certainly has improved in one aspect. Until about 10 years ago, only the
rich could live in a building that had lawns and pools, and many
billionaires did not have even that. But today the upper middle-class
can find residential buildings that have a pool and a gym. Even in this
redeeming quality, there is nothing special about Mumbai. Other cities
offer better homes at half the price.

But then people don’t quit Mumbai easily. They search for reasons to
explain this and find dubious virtues—like “energy", which is just
another word for “congestion", and a phenomenal nonsense called “spirit
of Mumbai", which this column has explained before is merely people
going to work against all odds because their homes are worse than their
offices.

The real reason people find it hard to quit Mumbai is in the notion of
home. A home has two powerful elements. Family and familiarity. Mumbai
is just too familiar for those who are used to it. That is why the
location of home is a matter of great luck, like the people who fill it.
For some people, the location of home is a curse.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*
