# Dismiss biomarkers that say you are ‘fine’ and live long

*2023-04-02*

Assume that a pandemic blinds over half the world’s people. Would modern
medicine deem blindness ‘normal’? That is highly probable if we consider
how health is viewed today. Take, for instance, what doctors are trained
to consider “normal ranges” in our blood test reports. Often, these
pleasant markers do not signify health at all, but only show where we
stand relative to other people. Yet, like sight, health is not relative.
In the world of the blind, a one-eyed man is not fit. Health is
absolute. Health is the best version of us.

At a time when gluttony, addiction to sugar and sloth have made a large
number of people unhealthy, we must dismiss what modern medicine says is
“normal” about us, and instead find ways to be exceptionally healthy.
This is the message in a new book Outlive: The Science and Art of
Longevity by Peter Attia, a physician and founder of Early Medical,
which helps people live long if they so wish.

He is a doctor who is frustrated with the mediocrity of modern medicine,
which he calls Medicine 2.0 with mild contempt. It is in the business of
prolonging death, which is glorious and lucrative, and not prolonging a
healthy life, which is less melodramatic. Meanwhile, modern food is
filled with things that can kill us. We are ancient bodies that ingest
new toxins. “Our genes no longer match our environment,” Attia writes,
“Thus, we must be cunning in our tactics if we are to adapt and thrive
in this new and hazardous world.” Cunning is an excellent choice of
word. The world, which is incapable of showing love without sugar, and
reassures us that our lipid profile is ‘normal’ because a large
proportion of people are worse, is an inadvertent conspiracy against us.
In response, we must constantly educate ourselves, be wary of some
foods, hike, swim and cycle, and lift weights. Should living be so much
work? But then, we must look at it as a form of self-absorption. Taking
care of ourselves is a better form of self-obsession than boring people
with tales from our past or being paranoid about digital privacy.

Attia accepts that genes play a major role in deciding our longevity and
its quality, but our “cunning” can be as influential as the cards we
have been dealt at birth. We need to eat like literates, develop aerobic
and muscle strength, take help from some magic drugs and supplements,
and try to be happy so that we do not commit the slow suicide widely
known as “living it up”.

I’ve followed Attia’s pronouncements for a few years. Not long ago, he
had a theological disdain for fast carbs and was a believer in the ‘keto
diet’ and intermittent fasting, which deplete the body of glucose
reserves and induce it to burn fat. But now Attia has a more
compassionate view—not towards sugar, but towards the diversity of our
bodies and the fact that not everyone can handle hardship just because
they want a long healthy life. Also, we cannot be sure of anything about
food. On nutrition, “…we know relatively little with complete
certainty,” Attia writes. But what we know is enough to link excess
consumption with early death or a prolonged joyless old age.

Modern medicine lulls people into a false sense of well-being through
biomarkers that emerge from blood tests. For instance, medicine
classifies people as non-diabetic, pre-diabetic or diabetic. People are
deemed fine, until one day they are not. But they were headed for
trouble all along. “It is absurd and harmful to treat this disease like
cold or a broken bone, where you either have it or you don’t; it’s not
binary,” Attia writes. So too with cardiovascular disease. It’s a
spectrum. Most people deemed fine are probably already in the early
stages of the disease, headed for a day when they will suddenly become
heart patients, or fall dead.

The terms “good cholesterol” and “bad cholesterol” that are given to LDL
and HDL, Attia points out, are meaningless. In fact, what he is most
interested in your blood report to assess if you actually risk early
mortality are two markers in blood most Indians don’t order from the
lab—the levels of apolipoprotein B and a lipoprotein called LP (a). The
level of LP (a) in your blood stream is genetically predetermined, and
if it is high, there is nothing you can do about it. Even so, Attia
feels that knowledge is useful. Once you know you are at high risk, you
should then try to lower other markers, even to the level of an
infant’s.

Apart from food, what alters one’s fate is what Attia calls “the most
powerful longevity drug”—exercise. He does rigorous exercises and is yet
to develop compassionate views on it. He hates the fact that people
think exercise is a broad ambiguous thing. It is a set of specific
things, each with a distinct function. To live long and well, he says,
one has to develop a large capacity to ingest oxygen, through aerobic
exercises like running, cycling and swimming, one has to build muscle
strength by lifting weights and increase grip strength by dangling from
a bar, etc, and one must improve the body’s flexibility and stability.

In our ‘cunning’ to survive our civilization, its food and the
mediocrity of modern medicine, Attia says we must include drugs. Not all
medicine, he feels, need the inconvenience of disease. He mentions two
with hope, rapamycin and metformin. Rapamycin is usually prescribed to
those who have undergone an organ transplant, to stop the body from
attacking the new organ. Metformin is prescribed to people diagnosed
with diabetes. They appear to have a beneficial effect on healthy
people, too. They are not yet cleared by regulators as health
supplements, but rich bio-hackers in the US might already be taking
them. And there are other such crypto-molecules that hold a lot of
promise.
