# Why it still matters what the West thinks of Modi’s India

*2023-03-12*

Let us say, you have to take on Narendra Modi and you need a bigger
political force than him for this, whom will you call? Which brings us
to why, a few days ago in London, Rahul Gandhi complained about the
demise of India’s democracy. He was doing what many disenchanted Indian
activists before him have attempted—campaigning to make the West a
counterweight to Modi and his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). Can the West
be that?

Seeking external influence to neutralize a local force is not an
esoteric tactic. Even ordinary people use it all the time—disenchanted
with their primary oppressor, they try to align with a bigger bully.

In the time of street thugs, loyalty was the protection money people
paid their thugs. When the thugs were not good enough to protect, people
shifted allegiance to a bigger thug. That is how the age of thugs may
have ended—when bullies could not protect people from more formidable
forces and people sought out more useful oppressors. The mechanism is
the same even today. People pay allegiance to a person, belief,
organization or an ideological bloc, but if they are not happy with what
they get out of their loyalty, they try to align with an equal or bigger
force.

The same tactic was at the heart of B.R. Ambedkar’s exhortation to
Dalits to abandon the very source of casteism, the Hindu religion, and
shift allegiance to Buddhism. This is also why many Dalit intellectuals
have glorified the English language and dismissed Hindi. One Dalit
activist even attempted to build a temple to Goddess English. Writers
and filmmakers who have been ignored by the Indian intellectual
establishment routinely try reaching out to the West, where the acclaim
industry is more influential. In fact, the value of intellectual acclaim
itself is that it is a counterweight to capitalism. And the humanitarian
movement in any nation is, one way or another, a part of the global
Western counterweight to local strongmen.

Rahul Gandhi did not exactly “address the British parliament" as some of
the Indian media reported; he spoke in one of the rooms there, to about
90 people, among whom there were some British parliamentarians. He told
them that Modi’s government was “stifling" and that being a member of
parliament in India was “quite rough" these days.

Before that, in a chat hosted by a think-tank, he said the Rashtriya
Swayamsevak Sangh, widely regarded as the mother ship of the BJP, was a
“fundamentalist, fascist organisation." “You can call it a secret
society," he said, “It’s built along the lines of the Muslim Brotherhood
and the idea is to use the democratic contest to come to power and then
subvert the democratic contest afterwards." A common message in all his
chats was that except for the fact that elections are held, India is not
a true democracy anymore. He also claimed his phone was bugged by the
Indian government, and that India “has already been invaded" by China.
Once, he stated that Europe and the US were not doing enough “to restore
democracy in India" as they profited from trade with India.

Rahul Gandhi may believe, rightly, that Indian democratic institutions
do not favour him anymore. Once, he probably respected these
institutions. After all, his party created them. But then, what use is
allegiance if the syndicate does not protect you? So he seems keen to
reach out to an external force, the West, to exert pressure on Modi to
be fair.

Shifting allegiance from one syndicate to another does not guarantee
success. For instance, Ambedkar himself faced failure. Most Dalits did
not convert. The Hindu religion, a formidable cultural force, largely
prevailed by reforming itself. The West was once a major player in the
local politics of emerging economies. It still might be in some, but not
anymore in India. As recently as 10 years ago, there were signs that
Modi was concerned by what the Western media thought of him. Also,
Western governments could arm-twist us with economic threats and
sanctions. All that has changed. It is possible that Modi has given up
on winning the affection of Western media. Also India is too big now for
the West to squeeze.

What does India want to be; which country is India’s role model? If you
asked the middle-class this 20 years ago, or even at the height of
India’s fake love affair with the Soviet Union, the answer would have
been “the United States." There was a general ambiguous feeling that the
West was, all said and done, good. But as people are more informed and
misinformed in the age of information, America and the rest of the West
do not have that moral heft anymore.

I do not see how the West can seriously infiltrate the present Indian
political system to “restore" fair practices. But there are some potent
aspects in the Western moral system that Modi and his BJP may
underestimate at their own peril. For instance, the West has a superb
monster-creating machine in its liberal media. Take, for instance, the
global image of Saddam Hussain, Vladmir Putin and even Donald Trump
himself. Modi is already in the cross-hairs of Western media, which is
an integral part of the ideological bloc known as the West. Modi’s image
there, I feel, is just a level better than Putin-Hussain and in the same
category as Tayyip Erdoğan and Jair Bolsonaro. It could get worse.

On crimes against humanity, the West might be hypocritical but its
concern is not fake. I believe that the West truly finds clear-cut evil
despicable. So there would likely be economic and political consequences
to a global perception, which Rahul Gandhi may have contributed to in
London, that Modi and the BJP committed such crimes.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
