# The difficult job of saying something good about India

*2023-01-02*

Most Indians do not need my help in identifying what they like about
India, so I must first diminish their confidence. They like the India
they see through their car windows, watching the many centuries that
co-exist in the present; the public chaos that they claim is the real
human condition, as opposed to the civic order of the West; and the low
threshold for happiness among the poor, and the high quality of domestic
life among the middle classes. I do not take these joys seriously
because I do not have romantic notions about excessive civic freedoms on
the road granted by an incompetent government, or the low standards for
happiness among the vast poor, who also subsidize the good lives of
those who have romantic views about India.

I present five good things about India that are not misunderstandings of
bad things.

**You might also like **

Keep an eye on these economic indicators in 2023

IBC plot twist may let defaulters keep the reins

Billimoria: from just 1 client to <span class="webrupee">₹</span>550
crore assets

Manufacturing PMI up but watch out for a spanner in the works

*One*: There is a sense of economic well-being, especially in the
immediate future, and this optimism has infected many social rungs. I
share this optimism, and through simple tools like buying shares, I plan
to bet big on India over the next five years. The quality of our lives
will not improve, but India’s economic ascent will continue.

It is true that the rich will get richer at a faster pace than the rest,
but I am not horrified by inequality. I find inequality a natural
consequence of progress, and in my defence, I present all of human
history in every square inch of the world. Equality is one of those
academic thought experiments that some people have taken too seriously.
What is as unnatural as equality, though, is modern abject poverty. Like
a slum, all modern poverty is a design flaw created by political
corruption, incompetence, idealism and other evils.

India is not only prospering, but also reducing the number of people who
have to endure the modern hell of poverty. That explains the rise of the
Bharatiya Janata Party in many regions. Most Indians are prospering and
feel their rise will continue.

*Two*: There is a persistence of peace and stability in India. India has
reasons to be war-torn, and descend into violent civil wars, like some
African nations with comparable per capita income. Yet, India has never
lost complete control of itself. It has pockets of war and violence, and
there exist thugs who are merciless with the defenceless, and most of
the nation is generally unsafe for women and children, but by the
standards of global strife, India is largely peaceful. Indians have
demonstrated, without articulating in sophisticated ways, that they see
wisdom in political stability.

Also, some of India’s evils have contributed to the peace. For instance,
the absence of European-grade human rights in Indian police stations and
the incompetence of the judicial system make it very expensive for
low-rung criminals to get caught, and for their handlers. What India
lacks in systems and efficiency, it inadvertently makes up for through
weak human rights.

*Three*: Even though Indians are practical, they are suckers for
idealism, not only in other people but also in themselves. In this way,
India has kept the morals of the freedom movement alive. Indian
politicians generally say the right things, claim to do the rights
things and are under pressure not to gloat over all the wrong things
that made them successful. We may scoff at idealism as merely theory,
but then, that is its actual job—to be a theory, to show how other
people should be, and also on good days how we ourselves should be, and
what we should hold up for our children, and to outline the best that is
possible in a human being, however improbable. As a result, most Indians
might be corrupt and may even reward criminals in elections, but they
retain a sense of righteousness, which is a fundamental right to
hypocrisy. Hypocrisy helps us, in an unconscious way, exert pressure on
the powerful to keep their practicality within limits. Without idealism,
we end up giving too much power to the shameless.

*Four*: India has not been subsumed by Western culture. Beyond its
social elite, India is not a desperate imitation of the West. The true
culture of a place is not what its intellectuals try to protect, but one
that does not require any egghead to revive—like food, wedding garments,
music and fun. An endangered lingual dialect, which cultural
conservationists try to save and almost always fail, demonstrates that
tradition cannot withstand the force of obsolescence. The West, with its
marvellous things, has made many ways of the world obsolete. But Indian
fun and some middlebrow art have been robust enough to survive. Most of
our films might be bad, but they are our trash and not borrowed. We
forget that there are vast regions in the world that do not have their
own films or music.

*Five*: The rise of collective shame. Indians are still not as ashamed
as they should be about the unnecessary difficulties of Indian life, but
they are more ashamed than they have ever been. And that is a good omen.
Shame is not always a performance; we do not need to be ashamed only in
the presence of foreigners. A state of the nation can fill us with shame
even if no one is watching. It is possible that as Indians prosper,
citizens will grow ashamed in indignant ways of poor air and dangerous
pot holes. I wish I could say that Indians may even grow ashamed of how
we treat those who have lost India’s cultural wars, like Muslims and
Dalits, but my promise was that I would say something good about India,
not something fanciful.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Pramit Bhattacharya tells how to* *save the Census* *from
disruptions. Jyotsna Jha says it's time to consider a* *wealth tax. Long
Story narrates entry of* *Indian farming in the carbon credits market.*
