# The character of Gurgaon is drawn from its rural roots

*2023-08-06*

Six feet above the ground, when no Indian is in the frame, parts of
Gurgaon look first world. There are these modern buildings made of glass
and steel. Gurgaon has the reputation of being affluent. Some of its
finest hotels are also called hospitals. There are apartments that cost
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>30 crore; those buildings have their own
spas. As a result, many people were surprised, or maybe amazed, when
mobs in Gurgaon burnt a mosque and several vehicles. They saw this as a
contradiction—that shiny real estate for global companies and home to
some of the highest paid Indians could also host religious riots. But
then, in real life, contradictions do not exist. That is the very nature
of contradictions—they cannot exist. Many things that people consider
contradictions are not: Sari-clad women who work as space scientists,
urchins gawking at a restaurant or riots in the shadow of a mall are not
contradictions. Their co-existence is natural. Gurgaon is perfectly
suitable for violence.

The true character of a new town is never in the ‘new’ part; it is in
the nature of its original population. They are the base.

I live in Gurgaon, which is less than 50km from Nuh, Ground Zero for the
spate of violence that spilled into Gurgaon. Schools shut and people did
not venture out. Household helps who do not wear sindoor have fled, and
those wearing vermillion have been filling in. A high proportion of
helps, delivery boys, air-conditioner mechanics and drivers are Muslim
migrants. Many of them have fled to Bihar, and it occurred to me that I
now live in a place that some people would flee for Bihar. How did I get
here?

Actual Gurgaon, which is mistakenly known as Old Gurgaon, emerges from a
pastoral way of life and is even today rustic, and mindful of caste and
religion. It has a history of communal tension, and is also one of the
worst regions in India for women. Its mother ship, Haryana has a gender
ratio of 879 females to every 1,000 males. (The national average is 940,
and Kerala’s is 1,084.)

Gurgaon of the old is all around, even in the heart of its ‘new town’,
not as adorable ruins but as omens. Dozens of free-range cows stand in
the middle of the road, sensing a new mysterious privilege. The
municipality is one of the worst managed in my experience. It is as
though people who have been entrusted to bring the city to villages
believe that they must bring villages to the city. Except for a stretch
called Golf Course Road, and a national highway, every other road is in
laughable shape. All this points to a political assurance that the votes
come for reasons other than civic standards, and those reasons are
economic and communal.

Gurgaon and the villages around it are strongholds of men who claim to
worship cows, some of whom assault unlucky Muslims who get caught with
them. Events in Nuh itself were partly caused by a cow vigilante called
Monu Manesar, who is on the run from police for the alleged murder of
two Muslims. He declared that he would attend an event at a temple in
Muslim-majority Nuh. According to several reporters, a procession of
Hindus led by a Hindu outfit was attacked by local Muslims. At the time
of writing, Manesar remains a free man.

In 2007, when Gurgaon was under rapid transformation and builders had
bought vast patches of farmland to develop, I met several farmers who
had suddenly become wealthy by selling land. They used to grow millets
and mustard making <span class="webrupee">₹</span>15,000 an acre. But
they saw a 500-fold increase in land prices over a decade. In the
delirium of sudden affluence, farmers were buying cars on full down
payment. They complained that women who used to wake up at four in the
morning to finish household work had discovered bed tea. They even
called it “bed tea”. When two neighbours now crossed each other, they
had a silent duel over who would say “Ram Ram” first. “The man who is
poorer should greet first,” a farmer said of the new etiquette. They
also discovered diabetes and heart disease.

Around that time, a woman who lived in an upscale area recalled that one
morning a visitor appeared at her doorstep. “I thought she wanted a job
as a maid, but then I realized she was looking for a house to buy.” The
sudden wealth left many villagers desperate for measures to manage it.
There was the story, which I hope is not apocryphal because it’s so
interesting, of five men who walked into a school and asked the teachers
if there was a smart girl of marriageable age among their students. The
men said their family had earned three crore from a land sale but they
were all illiterate. They had decided one of the brothers should marry
an educated girl who would know how to handle the money.

Old Gurgaon’s landed grew rich, but they had also become a social
underclass because of executive migrants who gave Gurgaon its reputation
for ‘cosmopolitanism’, a word with no meaning. About a decade ago, the
local men dealt with social confusion by routinely beating up sahibs
after street altercations. Now, the sahibs have become wiser.

Gurgaon continues to boom. The rent of my home has doubled in the last
two years. But the fundamental nature of the place is the nature of its
original people, the people of rural Haryana. Even Mumbai could not
pretend for long that it was anything more than a large Maharashtrian
town.

One of the great civil wars of our times is the battle between the idea
of the village and the idea of a city; the battle between roots and
rootlessness. It is a battle that the village is winning everywhere.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
