# Nano to Air India: What sets India’s swag apart now

*2023-02-19*

In the years when kung-fu movies released in theatres, many boys would
emerge from a show with a lot of swag, as though they were all martial
arts savants you should not mess with. The past few days, I have had a
bit of that second-hand sense of well-being after I read that Air India
was going to acquire nearly 500 planes from Boeing and Airbus, the
largest civil aviation order in history, and that the newly privatized
airline might buy a few hundred more, and that other Indian airlines,
taken together, might buy over a thousand planes in the next two years.
The euphoria reduces when I realize that Elon Musk alone can foot the
whole bill, but that is only transient annoyance in the persistence of a
joy.

When you derive optimism from the well-being of others, people in Madras
used to say, in rebuke, “So why are *you* happy?" And I can hear an
unknown Tamil woman’s reprimand at my borrowed sense of well-being.
“Good for Air India, but why are *you* happy?"

The intent to purchase so many planes suggests that India is thriving
and is going to thrive. People who look like me are going to do well.
The huge order of Air India was yet another corroboration of optimism
that has filled the middle classes despite tech job losses and the
perennial laments of salad-eaters in bleak professions that happiness
has long died in this world.

This is not the first time I have read in newspapers that the nation is
optimistic, but this is the first time I am taking part in it. I did not
consider India’s future bright after Pokhran, or during the tech boom
from 1998 to 2000, or when India was apparently “shining", or when Tata
Steel bought Corus, which was the largest Indian acquisition at the
time.

What was the big deal in exploding a bomb, that too one we did not
invent? In fact, what I saw in the rejoicing of the Pokhran tests was a
deep sense of cultural inferiority of some Indians who had migrated to
the West; they were the ones who were the most ecstatic. I was unmoved
by “India shining" because in my 20s, India was not shining for me, nor
did it for the millions who conveyed this message at voting booths. I
was unaffected by bull runs in markets because no one could convince me
then that markets were not rigged. In any case, the prosperity of market
gamblers only made rents and real estate expensive for the rest of us in
Mumbai, and vegetarian restaurants unbearably noisy.

The optimism of 2007 and 2008 was intense and persuasive. It was
manufactured and transmitted in my office, as it was in other media
offices. It all began around 2006, when steel billionaire Lakshmi Mittal
orchestrated a hostile takeover of what was once the largest steelmaker
in the world, the West European company Arcelor. Then, in 2007, Tata
Steel bought the Anglo-Dutch steelmaker Corus. There were other Indian
acquisitions.

Towards the end of 2007, a fervour as never seen before grew around the
launch of what Tata Motors said was the “people’s car" or the cheapest
car in the world. (A Pakistani countered with a local cheap car, which
was in reality a cart with the roof as an optional feature.)

An idea grew that Tata Motors’ mystery car is an omen that India will
make smart affordable tech for all emerging markets. There was global
attention. Tata Motors escalated the mystery by keeping all major
details of the car under wraps, including its name. *The Economic Times*
reported, “Some say it will be called ‘Jeh’ (the first three letters of
Jehangir RD Tata’s name) but there is another school that seems to
suggest that it will be called ‘Miracle’". But when the Nano was
launched, I felt the exact opposite of hope for India.

Later that year, even as the Nano appeared doomed, the Tatas bought
Jaguar and Land Rover from Ford. The Indian mainstream press, which was
not institutionally nationalistic, patriotic or right-wing or any of
those things, was ecstatic. Indian steelmakers were buying steel icons,
telecom companies were shopping abroad, and now this. But vast sections
of the middle class did not feel the thrill. They read about all the
seemingly good things that were happening, and that India was shining
again. But I could not feel any optimism around me, among the ordinary
people, because the paths to well-being were not clear, even to dream.

By the end of 2008, the optimism was over. India seemed to be sinking,
and a deep resentment grew against politicians. It came to the fore when
10 terrorists from Pakistan killed dozens of people in South Mumbai.
Young people who had never participated in politics took to the streets,
and even chased away a local Maharashtrian politician. This was, in
reality, the unsung origin of Anna Hazare anti-corruption movement of
2011, which was in reality an anti-politician movement.

But today, the economic optimism around me has a calm certainty about
it, despite the classical fears and uncertainties in the lives of
working people. Away from a few dismal professions, all of which are in
the media, people are preparing to thrive. They are ready for an age of
political stability provided by a right-wing government that reflects
the provincial practicality of a majority of new Indians. They are
preparing for an age of economic opportunities, of widespread adoption
of the internet and the smart phone, a dramatic increase in retail bets
on the stock market in the form of mutual funds. And, of course, a boom
in air travel.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
