# How to survive if you don’t feel proud of our Moon feat

*2023-08-27*

I do not feel any pride in India’s Moon landing. It did bring me
low-grade joy, like an Indian victory in Test cricket against
Bangladesh. But pride is a giant emotion. I wonder what made the others
proud? Did they imagine that they share the same genes as the scientists
who planned the mission? Or did they elect excellent space-faring
politicians? Or maybe they are beautiful hive-minds, who not only feel
pride, but also shame when India does shameful things? Or maybe they
donated money to the space programme? Or, maybe they sacrificed their
well-being by asking their children to pick space science and seek
government jobs instead of pursuing computer science and emigrating. Why
were they proud? What is this thing called pride? Maybe their localities
have excellent roads that do not resemble the lunar surface, and the
same government that sent metal to the Moon has also figured out how to
keep traffic signals working and runs excellent hospitals, or has
cleaned the air of cancerous particles? Maybe the joy in pride is not
thinking so much about it; maybe thinking is the enemy of feeling. You
cannot feel anything if you also want clarity.

What India’s Moon landing tells me though is that if India can do it,
many nations can. And if they don’t because it is too expensive, then it
means they pay their people high wages, while India underpays its
scientists and just about anybody down the chain. There is an
entertaining piece of data that says that every Moon mission of India
has been cheaper than a typical Hollywood big-budget film set in outer
space. But I do not believe these missions are as cheap as India
officially claims. I suspect they are subsidized in ways that are not
apparent on paper. In any case, as an amiable Indian rocket scientist
himself told me once, rocket science is an easy form of science; not
trivial, but still easier than solving malaria or other major scientific
efforts. Rocket science, oddly, is no rocket science.

This is not how most Indians feel, but then I am not alone either. How
must people who have not found a reason to be proud of India live in the
shadow of all this chest-thumping? How must we survive our times when we
do not feel how most of the nation feels about things? Maybe we lie low,
and confide only in those who are closest to us? But there is loneliness
in that, in not being a part of national feelings.

The origins of space-faring are in national pride. It was heavily
subsidized by nationalism in both the US and Russia. But then, at the
time, those two nations were truly doing what no one else could. Later,
the passion of the masses died down. The US, especially, cut budgets for
several programmes. More complex forms of science rose and they became
the focus, which eventually contributed to space science. But space
continues to hold appeal in India, and that points to a scarcity of
reasons for pride.

There is one mainstream criticism of India’s space mission—how can a
nation where children die of curable diseases and every big city is
unliveable waste resources on space missions? But this is not a robust
argument. Should a nation solve only one problem at a time, and keep
somewhat esoteric ideas in abeyance until the more difficult ones are
sorted? That does not make sense. India is right in pursuing space, but
it is wrong about one of its important justifications for its Moon and
Mars missions—that the missions have branded India as scientifically
advanced. There is a popular view that with the recent Moon landing,
India has entered a “prestigious club" of four nations. But that is not
how prestige works. Instead, the entry of India reduces the prestige of
Moon landings itself. We see the principle at work in the prestige of
academic institutions and entrance exams. The old elite lend the initial
prestige, which becomes an allure that makes the lower rungs work hard
to achieve it. But their entry into the prestigious fortress reduces its
very prestige.

If India wants its space-faring to lend it a certain scientific heft in
global perception, it needs to do a host of mundane things first, like
create a more orderly nation. As of now, if anyone lands in Delhi, or
worse, in Mumbai, or by even worse misfortune, Bangalore, the full civic
dysfunction of the country is apparent in no time.

Also, India continues to be in the news for things that usually happen
in some of the most backward regions in the world. In that light,
India’s ability to land on the Moon takes away the veneer of
sophistication from such missions.

But all this is irrelevant to those who are moved by national pride.
Pride is a low-hanging fruit of happiness. I do not grudge them that.
Many people go through their whole lives doing nothing they can be proud
off, so why not usurp a bit from the nation? Maybe national pride is a
natural resource, like a river or a forest. It is not without important
uses.

But, somehow, people do not feel the same way about shame. People don’t
look around at the corruption and mediocrity in evidence, even when they
take two hours every day to travel a mere 20 kilometres in a city, and
feel the shame of it all. Even though they probably have a greater role
in our disgrace than what is exceptional about some of us.

Or, maybe people do feel shame. I was looking in the wrong places. I was
chatting with fintech entrepreneur Kunal Shah in a totally different
context, about human nature in general, and he said, “I guess pride is a
side of shame."
