# Why diversity can’t be used in defence of obsolete ways

*2023-07-09*

Is there only one way to be good? This is the question of the season, as
politicians preparing for general elections next year measure the
interest of Hindu society in reforming other people, a process that is
not without a bit of torment.

Prime Minister Narendra Modi has expressed a desire to end or dilute
personal laws that let religious traditions govern important aspects of
domestic life, like the exclusivity of marriage, divorce and
inheritance, generally favouring men. Over the decades, Hindu
reformation has ensured that most Hindus enjoy or endure modern laws
that deem men and women equal. They have agreed to consider caste
discrimination illegal, unless it is used to favour ‘lower castes’, and
Hindu men have conceded vast ground to Hindu women. But Indians of other
faiths, especially Muslims, have markedly different rules for marriage,
divorce and inheritance. A Muslim man can take four wives, negotiate a
favourable alimony, divorce easily and expect to inherit a
disproportionate share of property. This has for long annoyed Hindu men.
Muslim women would have never guessed so many Hindus wish them well.
Bringing Muslims into the fold of the Uniform Civil Code (UCC) has for
long been the political desire of an unknowable proportion of Hindus.
But it involves the inconvenience of forcing hundreds of tribes to abide
by the same, which has little emotional resonance among the majority but
is needed for the spectacle of national reformation.

Opposition to a UCC has two faces—one that is emotional and the other
that is esoteric. The primary defence of the clergy and other
conservatives who benefit from existing personal laws is that the
influence of religion in their domestic life is the core of their
religious identity and that in any case they have done a bit of internal
reform. Also, some tribes, whose ways of life are protected by the
Constitution, have threatened revolt if these are subsumed by a
reformation. For instance, among Khasi people, family inheritance goes
to the youngest daughter. How can modernity better this; so why change?
The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, the primary pressure group of Hindus,
too has in the recent past objected to proposals that alter some ways of
life, like the government’s bid to raise the minimum age for women to
marry to 21 from 18. Should modernity interfere so much with society, it
wondered.

The more esoteric argument against a UCC comes from people who are not
religious or traditional, but who lament the loss of something called
diversity. An odd thing about worshippers of diversity is that they are
usually a monoculture themselves. That is the point they miss.

It is in the nature of public morality and reformation to insist that it
is common to all, that there is only one way to be right, to be just.
What is diversity, then? Just a fancy dress parade of costumes and cute
marriage functions and weird food? I think it is a bit more than that.

Language, climate and culture do influence how people think, and how
people think matters. People who do not have eight words for shame think
differently from people who speak in more vivid languages, and
hot-climate philosophers are different from cold-climate philosophers, a
matter for another day. So diversity is not trivial. But when it comes
to the reformation of a society, that process where some things that
were created to favour some people in another time are altered for
fairness, there is not much scope for diversity. Across the world and
across ages, human beings have demonstrated that there are diverse ways
of being unfair and only one way of being fair. This is why morality is
a form of clarity. So, by its basic nature, a reformation has to be
‘uniform’. The argument that diversity must be preserved because it is
ancient heritage, and preservation is a good thing, is farcical.

People are and will be inescapably diverse—in appearance, in speech and
in what they like to eat and how they think—but what modern India is
trying to say through its UCC campaign is that in some important matters
of domestic life, everyone will have to leave the antiquity that created
their traditions and step into modernity, which is the name of a time
that has won a cultural war.

Actually, all personal laws were, at one time, the uniform code of the
victorious who replaced diverse tribal customs with mainstream religious
edicts. The first imposition of Sharia law, for instance, was done by a
Muslim elite which abolished the cultural practices of tribes that had
adopted Islam. Hinduism and Christianity did the same.

Critics of Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party point out that the problem with
a UCC is that the party’s intention is not noble. Amartya Sen said a few
days ago, “…There is definitely some connection between the urgency to
implement the UCC and paving the way for the far-fetched idea of Hindu
Rashtra.”

But then, that is how society reforms. It is naïve to believe that
societies become better because people want to suddenly become better,
or slowly for that matter. A society changes because parents love their
children, children don’t want to be their parents, and one community has
a grouse against another and wishes to torment it on moral grounds.
Modern democracy itself originated partly in the disenchantment of
Britain’s second rung of society, people who sought to control the
monarchy by forcing it to accept a set of moral undertakings.

After love, it is grouse that makes the world a better place.
