# The myths around a man in the internet hall of fame

*2023-01-15*

He is Aaron Swartz, a programming prodigy. When he was 14, he worked on
an early version of Really Simple Syndication, better known as the RSS
feed. At 15, he helped develop Creative Commons licence, which is a way
of making copyrighted material free. At 19, he was among the founding
figures of Reddit. Eventually, he became an activist and fought for a
cause that seemed noble 10 years ago but might not make as much sense
today: “a free internet". He hanged himself in Brooklyn on 11 January
2013. He was 26.

**You might also like **

Mamaearth’s plans put risky new-age IPOs in focus

Budget may offer sops for shift to green mobility

With $1 billion, Apax leads in race for Quest Global stake

Why Europe’s largest asset manager is betting big on India

After he made a small fortune when his startup was merged into Reddit,
and Reddit was then sold, he got involved in activism, chiefly to make
information free. He hacked the servers of MIT and stole a large number
of academic papers from a journal that were behind a paywall, probably
to make them accessible to the public. He was caught and faced charges
that were more serious than he may have imagined. He seemed to have no
intention to be a martyr. But he did reject an offer to plead guilty,
which would have got him a maximum jail sentence of six months. At the
time of his suicide, in his Brooklyn apartment, he faced 35 years in
prison, apart from financial ruin.

Many believe that MIT and US federal government had overreacted to a
boy’s symbolic act of defiance against capitalism. Ten years after his
death, his position as a pre-eminent internet martyr is beyond dispute.
Yet, the truth is probably more unremarkable than the myths surrounding
a hero. After every suicide, people try to find reasons, which tend to
align with their own grouses and ambitions and griefs.

Swartz was an activist, but by the time he died, he had moved beyond the
ambiguous space of internet freedom. The net itself had become complex.
By 2013, it had begun to resemble the world, and no one fights to keep
anything in the real world ‘free’.

As in the case of many successful activists, Swartz had some conditions
that made normal life and its banal joys difficult. He had dietary
problems, oversensitivity to ordinary experiences, ulcerative colitis,
and possibly other worries. A few weeks after his death, Larissa
MacFarquhar wrote about him in *The New Yorker* magazine. I was struck
by this portion: “His girlfriend Taren always dealt with taxi-drivers,
with waitresses. He hated feeling that he was in a position of power
over someone, and he hated asking for help."

Swartz once wrote in his blog: “When I go to a library and I see the
librarian at her desk reading, I’m afraid to interrupt her, even though
she sits there specifically so that she may be interrupted, even though
being interrupted for reasons like this by people like me is her very
job."

MacFarquhar writes, “This wasn’t a simple matter of humility. Having
power over other people made you into something he disdained. Being a
boss wasn’t just immoral; bosses were stupid."

He tried a corporate job but did not survive too long.

In an interview conducted on Reddit, the interviewer asks Swartz, “Are
you working for Reddit as full-time programmer?"

Swartz: “No, I left reddit several months ago."

Interviewer: “Why did you leave?"

Swartz: “My boss asked me to."

Interviewer: “Can you explain what happened?"

Swartz then gives a vague answer about holidaying in Europe and getting
back to work in US where he was surprised to be sacked. But what
happened was when he was in Europe his ulcerative colitis flared up. He
did not tell anyone. This condition can trigger suicidal thoughts. When
his boss at Reddit checked his blog he found a short fiction about a
character named Aaron who got sacked and then committed suicide. He was
fired, in real life, a few days after this episode.

In a blog post written in 2005, he says he has left computer programming
and taken up sociology because “I want to save the world."

There was someone else, closer home, who did something similar. A
student of microbiology, Rohith Vemula, shifted to sociology because, as
he stated, he wanted to make the world a better place. He too killed
himself, and by hanging. On 17 January, six days after the third
anniversary of Swartz death.

Sociology is an odd field for those who wish to save the world. One of
the fathers of sociology is Auguste Comte, who invented and wore attire
that had buttons only at the back so that he would not be able to wear
it without assistance, thus requiring the attendance of another person
for the simple act of dressing up. What good can come from such minds?

The hidden darkness in some ideas endures the way only darkness can, and
infects the young, who writhe in their own anguish, searching for a
glorious reason to hang their reasonless pain.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*

**Elsewhere in Mint**

*In Opinion, Merryn Somerset Webb says it's a gamble to let* *woke
ideas* *form your portfolio. Nitin Pai writes on the chances of an*
*open decentralized internet. Long Story showcases* *27 tech wonders*
*from CES Las Vegas.*

 
