# A brief history of India’s fake claims to true happiness

*2023-03-26*

Over the past decade, a global survey has been asking thousands of
people across the world how happy they are on a scale of zero to ten, in
six distinct ways of being happy. Their answers form the core of the
annual *World Happiness Reports*, which have been a source of periodic
unhappiness for many Indians. India is consistently ranked at the
bottom, among dystopian nations, unhappier than even Pakistan, which
triggers special trauma in sensitive Indians. The 2023 *World Happiness
Report* does not actually rank India 126th out of 137 nations. Indians
have ranked themselves, inadvertently showing us as people who are
sadder than Ukraine, Russia, Iraq, Sri Lanka and, of course, Pakistan.
Any measure of happiness involves a few foolish processes, and these
reports do couch left-wing righteousness as anthropology, but they are
less nonsensical than a fable my generation grew up hearing: that
Indians are “the happiest people on earth”.

Among the first things we heard as children was that the rich were
unhappy and the poor were happy. Also, Indians apparently had an innate
spiritual power that no one else possessed, some great ancient secret
that the West came seeking. Every now and then, a public figure would
speak of an unhappy West and our joyful poor. In a Shah Rukh Khan film,
his character scoffs at the loneliness of Americans who had “everything”
but did not have family, while admiring Indians who had nothing but
whose lives were filled with family. In the age of social media, we see
posts claiming to be true portraits of happiness. These often feature
images of the poor diving into a pond or enjoying rain. It appears water
is somehow vital to the visual representation of joy.

All through this farce, India has been one of the most miserable places
on earth. As an Indian reporter who has travelled through India and the
West, I find it easy to believe the broad conclusions of the 2023
report—that West Europeans are most likely to rate themselves as happy,
that suicide rates say nothing about happiness anywhere, and that the
average Indian is among the world’s least happy.

This rings untrue to upper middle-class Indian patriots because they are
among the happiest. They would score well on the *World Happiness
Report*’s survey that asks people to rate their own happiness on six
aspects of life: social support of peers, financial well-being, health,
freedom to make important decisions, generosity of society and the
absence of corruption.

The bafflement of India’s middle class at the nation’s rank among the
most miserable is actually predicted by the report in one of its more
credible exercises—a country’s measure of joy inequality. To measure
this form of inequality, the report takes the happiest half of a sample
in a nation and its unhappiest half, and then considers the gap that
separates them. In Finland, ranked the happiest nation in the world, the
gap between the top half and bottom half is narrow. This means there is
a near uniformity in how people rate themselves.

Several affluent nations demonstrate such uniformity. But the nation
that is most equal in its self-valuation of happiness is not a happily
rich nation, but Afghanistan, which is among the world’s most miserable
places. This means that in Afghanistan, the happiness of the top half is
not much higher than that of the bottom half. In other words, the
country is almost uniformly miserable.

On the equality of joy, too, India fares poorly. Indians who rate
themselves as happy are much happier than those who say they are
unhappy. This reflects an India that even the sightless can see—a
country where life is very good for the rich and miserable for the poor;
where it is vastly advantageous to be born in the right home, and a
severe handicap not to.

There is, of course, a big problem in this attempt to measure the
happiness of nations. It is not, as patriots argue, in its
“methodology”. Asking people whether they are happy is a reasonable way
to measure this abstract quantity. The problem is not with the sample
size either. The report claims that “typically” around 1,000 people,
irrespective of population, participate in the survey every year. We can
quarrel with the report on whether this is enough to make overarching
pronouncements on our sense of well-being, but this is not an important
argument. The report’s real problem is why it even exists. This is not
an exercise a Donald Trump or Elon Musk or a conservative strongman
anywhere would consider worth his time. That should point us to the sort
of people who would be interested in such a survey—economists who want a
welfare state.

Not very long ago, the same kind of people promoted Bhutan as the
happiest place on Earth. It worked. In the 2013 Hindi film, *Lunchbox*,
an unhappy woman in Mumbai plots to flee to Bhutan in search of joy.

Bhutan’s experiments with happiness began in 1972, when king Jigme
Singye Wangchuck popularized the idea of ‘gross national happiness’. In
the 2000s, this juvenile idea caught the imagination of liberal
economists who thought they had found a tool to defame the focus on
economic growth. But, it turns out, Bhutanese people do not rate
themselves well on the happiness scale. The first *World Happiness
Report*, published in 2012, pays rich tribute to Bhutan, but the country
is ranked low. It is western Europe that has consistently regarded
itself happy.

The moral of the story is that the secret to happiness may lie in
colonizing, brutalizing and plundering vast regions of the world so that
you can one day raise a financially pampered and socially compassionate
population that cycles to work.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
