# Telgi’s fate may have been different if he’d bought votes

*2023-09-10*

Sometime in the 1990s, word spread in Mumbai’s dance bars that a man had
spent <span class="webrupee">₹</span>80 lakh on a gorgeous dancer in a
single night. The amount mentioned in the rumour had kept increasing for
some hours before settling at “80 lakhs.” There was no doubt though that
a man known as Abdul Karim Telgi had tipped the dancer a considerable
sum. The inner circles of dance bars include cops. The news evoked the
curiosity of the police, who discovered a man who had built an elaborate
business counterfeiting stamp paper and other forms of revenue
stationery. They had stumbled upon a perennial source of income. Telgi,
who had starved as a child and sold fruits as a young man, had made a
fatal error in trying to impress a dancer. But at the time, even the
cops did not know how big Telgi’s operation was. Actually, no one still
knows the full scope of his scam. What is certain is that he stole
thousands of crores from the government.

Telgi is the subject of a SonyLiv show called Scam 2003, which is part
of a series on endearing scams created by Hansal Mehta and Applause
Entertainment. Telgi’s story is rare because it offers a clear glimpse
into the making of a class of Indian politicians and the enormous sums
of money in the underbelly of a corrupt country. The story would have
never got out if he had fully evolved into a politician. He was getting
there, though, to a point where an entire past of a ‘leader’ can be
erased.

We like con-men, especially if they have not conned us. My favourite is
the man who sold insurance to train passengers who wished to travel
ticketless—if they were caught by a ticket checker, he would compensate
the fine.

And there was that genius or a band of geniuses who claimed they were
from the income tax department, placed newspaper classifieds to recruit
interns, and raided a jewellery shop only to disappear forever. Telgi
was different. He was somewhere between a con-man and a more menacing
politician. He was convicted of “culpable homicide not amounting to
murder,” after a man who stole from him ended up as a corpse in the
Arabian Sea, which has an inconvenient high tide.

The Telgi story was broken by the journalist Sanjay Singh, whose book,
Telgi: A Reporter’s Diary is the primary source material of the online
series. When he first got hold of a confidential police report on the
full scale of Telgi’s scam, the seasoned journalist did not divulge its
details even to his boss, Rajdeep Sardesai. “If you want to keep a
secret do not tell your boss about it.”

In the book, Singh writes that at its peak, Telgi’s enterprise of
selling counterfeit stamp papers across India employed hundreds of
people. “The top tier of Telgi’s workforce comprised chartered
accountants and senior marketing managers. The bottom tier included over
three hundred and fifty agents, graduate sales and marketing executives,
delivery teams and telemarketing teams…”

Telgi could not have run the operation without help from politicians and
the police. Actually, every powerful person who got wind of his
operation extorted from him. He fed them all. By this time, Telgi was
already found guilty of forgery and fraud, but the police never arrested
him. He was “an absconder.” As for why they couldn’t nab him, the police
told the court astonishing things. One excuse of a police officer was,
Singh writes, “I was so wrapped up in listening to the court’s verdict
that I missed Telgi’s escape from courtroom.”

In return, Telgi enriched all the people who could protect him. So what
led to his arrest? What brought him to justice? This is a part of the
most underrated question in India. Why do right things happen in the
country?

Singh asks Telgi himself to solve the mystery. After Telgi’s enormous
tip to the bar dancer, new policemen would keep appearing at his door to
extort him. Telgi had no choice. “My paper was like currency too. I gave
them my paper, they sold it in the market and earned money.” But then,
they “got greedy.” They included the names of Telgi’s wife and children
in their charge-sheet against him. They did this to milk him for more
money. They had no evidence against Telgi’s family, according to Telgi,
but if they could harass them they thought he would pay them more for
their freedom. But it was a blunder, on par with Telgi’s generosity to
the bar dancer.

Telgi knew that if he yielded once, there would be no end to the
extortion. He defied the police, and in a sequence of events, as they
tried to build a case against him to wear him down, they created a
monster that went out of control. Eventually, rival police groups would,
in pure self-interest, set in motion a process they would not be able to
control. As it often happens, justice was the accidental outcome of a
war between two powerful camps.

Telgi was convicted on several charges and was to spend three decades in
prison. But he died in 2017, after about a decade in jail, at the age of
56. Some politicians and several senior police officers were implicated,
but they were later deemed innocent.

Telgi’s story, too, could have been different, and of course a secret,
if he had invested in his own political clout. Charisma is nonsense.
Attend a legislative assembly session, you will be cured of the view
that charisma wins elections. Telgi did give away crores in charity, but
that was a paltry corporate-social responsibility-like ration compared
to his wealth. That was enough, though, to get over 2,000 people to
attend his funeral.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
