# What the Palestine conflict says about human nature

*2023-10-22*

If 2,000 heavily armed terrorists have a free rein inside a nation they
despise, how many people do you imagine they would kill? On 7 October,
nearly 2,000 Hamas terrorists infiltrated Israel; they killed about
1,400. This points to the likelihood that some or many Hamas terrorists
did not kill anyone that day. What did they do? Just walked around? I
think so. The terrorists did injure over 3,000, and took over 200
hostages; even so, considering the fact that thousands of civilians were
entirely at the mercy of terrorists for hours, what explains a death
toll that is less than the number of militants? Even if you discard
Israel’s assessment of 2,000 terrorists, there appears little dispute
that over 1,000 had entered Israel. Why was the massacre
disproportionate to what we imagine would happen if 1,000 to 2,000
terrorists walked into our residential areas carrying machine guns,
rocket launchers and grenades? We can argue that the areas along the
Gaza-Israel border were not densely populated. But at one of the first
targets, the Supernova Music festival, there were over 3,000 in
attendance. Here, about 250 were killed. We can argue that maybe
thousands managed to flee at the first sign of trouble; they scattered
and they hid. But what if something else was at play?

What if some or many terrorists were incapable of being as barbaric as
they had fantasized? This is not unusual. In Afghanistan, some suicide
bombers were known to veer away from crowded parts and detonate the bomb
in quieter places. In the 1863 Battle of Gettysburg during the American
Civil War, most soldiers refused to fire, writes Rutger Bregman in his
book, Humankind: A Hopeful History. They even pretended to fire, and
reload, to appease their superiors.

The latest phase in the Israel-Palestine conflict is uniquely brutal for
Israel, and brutal in a very familiar way for Palestinians. At first
glance, it makes us lose hope in humanity, in our most important
hypothesis that there is some point in human life, that we may not
exactly know what that point is, but it somehow involves our revulsion
for barbarity. But we just need to look more carefully at the world’s
desperate attempts to persuade Israel to realize what it already knows,
that “revenge is a lazy form of grief,” as a character says in the film
The Interpreter.

Most people attach a high value to human life, including that of people
they despise. I do not say this makes us safer. In fact, this makes us
unsafe. In a world where most people are incapable of killing, a few
demented people can be highly efficient at it. I only say that there is
hope because peace appears to be natural to humans. Maybe it is not as
ancient as humans, maybe it is not a primordial thing, but it is now at
the heart of all modern human societies.

This is also the reason why Palestine’s public relations always trumps
Israel’s. Even though over 1,000 Jews were massacred, some of them
brutally, the moral high ground shifted from Israel in just a day—to
Palestinian Arabs. This is because consciously and unconsciously the
world wants to protect Palestinians from Israeli vengeance. Consciously
and unconsciously, they can see what had happened to the region’s Arabs.
They were ‘the natives’ barely considered human by early European
settlers, an experience Indians and indigenous people everywhere
suffered. Such natives were usually obliterated so completely, there was
no question of festering political wounds. But by the time European Jews
had colonized Palestine, Europeans had lost the moral capacity for the
obliteration of natives. So, maybe, even in the festering of a
historical wound, there is evidence of human compassion. The Jews of the
1940s, victims and survivors of genocides themselves, could not commit a
genocide, however convenient that may have been.

It may not seem at first glance that many conservative Hindus care for
Palestinians. Social media amplifies a particular sort of people and
bots. I can easily believe news reports that a lot of anti-Palestine
fake news emerges from India. Even so, I sense that the sympathy of the
average Hindu is with Palestinians. This is because people, in general,
are conservative when the stakes are high, when stuff directly affects
them, and liberal when the stakes are low, as in international affairs.
People need to take a tough stance to protect their home and way of
life, and because of that they need to compensate by taking up just
causes far away. Palestine is that just cause. This is why there is no
such thing as a global right-wing, while liberals are a global
monoculture. This is why a high proportion of Hindus are unlikely to
back Israel, and many Israelis probably have deep sympathy for the
plight of Indian Muslims. This too points to the humane drift of modern
societies.

Indians who think they despise Palestinians, I suspect, do not really
despise Arabs they have never met; they only despise sanctimonious posh
preachers here in India. They need to take the opposite view of the
sermonizing intellectuals who annoy them. So, perhaps, most of the venom
on social media is not as bad as it seems.

As I write this, there are several videos of kids covered in cement and
dried blood, quaking, as though an explosion is still reverberating in
their slight bodies. Every time we figure out that an image of this
nature is not from Palestine, we feel some relief. As though these kids
covered in cement and blood never existed. Maybe a time will come when
these things never happen anywhere, that they become obsolete, like
psychotic European explorers.
