# How we survive bores and others probably survive us

*2023-01-29*

In the film *Banshees of Inisherin*, a musician stops talking to his
friend because he finds the friend a bore. Inisherin is a fictional but
highly probable Irish hamlet on a desolate island inhabited by less than
50 people. Choice of human companionship here is narrow; the musician’s
friend is a good man, who is famous in the village for his niceness, yet
the musician is unable to endure another day of banter with him.

In the past few months, *Banshees of Inisherin*, which is written and
directed by Martin McDonagh, has become one of the most admired films in
the world. Not many may have complained when it got nine Academy Award
nominations this month. It is as though people can see their lives in
the film, surely as victims of bores and not as bores themselves. But
then, most of us are both, depending on circumstances.

People develop techniques to avoid or endure bores. They also develop
techniques to become interesting to other people, even though they may
not regard themselves as dull. But nothing really works in the face of
the most cruel conversational structure in human communication—the
one-on-one, when two people are left alone in a cafe or bar, or in
Inisherin. The problem is with the number ‘two’. A person is adjudged
dull only in a one-on-one.

A conversation between two individuals is very different from all other
forms of conversation. By now, you would have guessed that what these
two people mean to each other is intrinsic to what I am trying to say.
Two new lovers who can just gaze at each other like fools, or a father
and daughter whose silences are not wounds or rebukes, are not relevant
to this generalization. The full tragedy of the one-on-one emerges
between acquaintances and sometimes even good friends, and of course
spouses.

It is much easier to speak to a thousand people than to one person. A
three-person conversation, too, is much simpler because you can stop
talking any time and the conversation could still go on, and if there is
silence, you do not have to take responsibility for it, and you can be
amusing and perform for the world, even though the world is not present,
just two of its emissaries. On the other hand, the one-on-one expects
both parties to be interesting, a quality that most people in the world
do not possess or possess only in a certain context.

This is why for social meetings, I have ‘the rule of three’, which is
also the name of a writing principle that states that placing three
characters in a scene is generally more interesting than two. I do this
not only because I fear getting bored, but also because I want to
protect the person who wants to meet me from me.

Maybe I have a lot to say to a thousand people and very little to say to
just one person.

An important part of the film’s premise is that the nice man is fond of
the musician; yet, the musician cannot stand him anymore. Usually,
people don’t consider how they can avoid people who are fond of them. Or
that they might be boring to their own friends and family.

Most people find the company of their friends interesting almost
entirely because their friends like them. One way in which people reduce
the dullness of dull company is by converting the affection of the dull
into entertainment, mixed with some alcohol.

As a result, most people in the world have a huge capacity to endure
small talk.

We can endure friends who laugh at their own statements, who come to a
conversation armed with knowledge of the eight articles they have read
on blockchain, and who quote the philosophies of “zen masters”. People
also survive other people through our most enduring myth that good
behaviour is more important than a good chat.

People exert pressure on others to be nice because they are terrified of
rudeness, which takes us deeper into a person. We endure dullness
because it can protect us from the depths of other people.

Now and then, like the musician, some people decide they have had enough
of small talk, of the dullness of sweet inconsequential people. They
therefore decide to break friendships and acquaintances. They even end
marriages. Many marriages end because of dullness, but it is in the
nature of spouses to claim grander reasons as though they are afraid the
family court judge will laugh at them for ending a marriage because it
is merely dull. But many divorces are actually proof that people can go
to great lengths to end dullness.

When the musician decides to stop talking to his friend, the friend is
aghast and starts hounding him, seeking a more respectable reason. Like,
maybe the musician is dying? If everyone in the world were as honest as
the musician with themselves, in seeing clearly why they wish to end a
relationship with a person who likes them, the world would be filled
with the lament, ‘you bore me, that’s all.’

Unable to bear the hounding of his friend, the musician makes a threat.
If the nice man tries to talk to him one more time, the musician would
chop a finger. Then every time the nice man tries to talk, one more
finger would go.

People who walk away from the dullness of friendly banter, too, are
prepared to endure pain. They become lonely, and may also suffer
professionally. Success, one way or another, is a reward for friendship.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series,* ‘Decoupled’
