# We must end the life-altering power of a college-degree

*2023-04-10*

There are allegations that two college degrees held by Narendra Modi are
not authentic. But the Prime Minister is not in trouble, because somehow
he is never in trouble. In this particular case, even if the degrees he
is said to hold are fake, I am glad he will not face its consequences.

The way people scorn politicians for not going to college, it is as
though they possessed some great intelligence or skill to walk into
college. It is particularly amusing when those who scorn are graduates
in the humanities. It takes little effort to get an arts degree. Most
people got into college because they filled an application form and paid
fees. And most emerged from college with no special skill or knowledge.
You may argue that the controversy is not over the value of college, but
in the deception, if any. But any Indian faking an arts degree is only
responding to an evil force. The prestige attached to college degrees is
a caste system. Educated Indians are complicit in this, for it is they
who manufactured the stigma for college-illiterates, which is one of two
reasons that millions of Indians are forced to produce fake
certificates. The other reason is the absurd requirement of a college
degree for so many jobs that do not require such education**.**

The contempt for Modi’s possible lack of education is, in part, a
reaction to his party’s growing reputation for suppressing dissent with
disproportionate force. But the glorification of college education by
the sort of people whose only achievement is that their parents sent
them to college is also a form of bullying. Maybe of a worse kind
because it has the sheen of virtue.

In its campaign to make Modi pay for his probable fake degrees, the Aam
Aadmi Party (AAP) has resorted to calling him “illiterate”. AAP’s
campaigns are usually very sharp and effective, but this is going to
work against the party. It is influenced by the high educational
qualifications of Arvind Kejriwal, who is an engineer, and his party’s
success in improving the quality of government schools. But calling Modi
“Illiterate” is the same as making fun of most Indians. It reinforces
the shame of poverty or poor exam-taking skills.

Often, when organizations ask for a college degree, they only seek an
easy way to disqualify most job applicants. This is unfair because most
Indians get a bad start in life and their educational levels, especially
if they have been to school, do not represent their ability to do a
particular job. Why then must India promote a system that rewards people
for their mere luck?

If AAP were truly a humanitarian force, it would continue to provide
high-quality free education to the poor, and also campaign to end the
requirement of college education for government jobs that do not require
college education. The US has begun to do exactly this. A few days ago,
Barack Obama tweeted, “Here’s an example of a smart policy that gets rid
of unnecessary college degree requirements and reduces barriers to good
paying jobs. I hope other states follow suit.” He linked an article
which points out some US states are easing requirements and opening up
opportunities for non-college-educated workers. America used to be a
place where a person who did not go to college could still earn a decent
living on a factory floor and find social respect, too. Also, he had an
opportunity to rise in his company. But then, the rise of tech and jobs
that required people to appear sophisticated, and a job shortage that
led to new ways of eliminating applicants resulted in a huge rush for
college degrees, which eventually increased the cost of higher
education. American politicians and private companies are responding to
end the absurdity.

Many US tech majors have got rid of the need for college degrees in some
positions. Since 2011, American billionaire Peter Thiel has run a grant
that bribes young people to drop out of college and start a business.

India’s new education policy has elements that are bold and smart. It
widens the meaning of education beyond sciences and languages, which
have long put many at a disadvantage. The policy has brought some actual
skills like carpentry into the ambit of mainstream school education.
Also, it proposes to enable a person to leave college midterm and resume
the pursuit of a degree later. But what India needs to do is eliminate
the life-altering power of a piece of paper called the college degree.

There can be some arguments against this. Thousands apply for every
vacancy in India. We have heard stories of how hundreds of
post-graduates, even engineers, applied for the job of a peon. If that
is the case, there may be mayhem if the filter of a college degree is
removed. But then, this is not a fair reason to discriminate against
those who could not attend college. Let there be mayhem. If 1,000
postgraduates apply for a job, let 10,000 school dropouts apply too. In
the end, for jobs that require some aptitude and not technical
knowledge, employers must devise effective ways of picking candidates
instead of creating a meaningless caste system.

Another argument can be that if people have an incentive to go to
college, they may discover something useful. What is so great about the
world outside college? Most jobs are joyless. College, for all its
flaws, is less dreary than the typical entry-level job. So what is so
wrong in sending Indians in pursuit of a piece of paper if this pursuit
is better than what they would endure otherwise?

Ideally, a society should fully fund the pursuit of knowledge, but
separate it from the job market. The joy of discovery or even idleness
in college has value, but that does not justify granting an unfair
advantage to some who get to go there.

*Manu Joseph is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series*, Decoupled.
