# Palestinians will do better without long-distance lovers

*2023-10-15*

The fortune of Israel was that it made for very bland photojournalism.
All the trauma of the Levant was on the other side of the fence, in
Gaza. That changed on 7 October when Hamas terrorists killed over a
thousand Israelis in their homes, and not all of them were killed “with
guns”, in the words of an Israeli spokesperson.

It was an exceptional event, and it was followed by a common
phenomenon—a torrent of low-stakes rage from people who lived far away
from the region. The Israel-Palestine issue has for long been the
world’s biggest source of cheap rage, from both Muslims and those who
despise them. There is a serious problem with the strong opinions of
people who do not have to bear the consequences of their opinions.

After the massacres of Israelis, Muslims in many parts of the world
rejoiced. Muslims in Western Europe and America took out festive
processions in support of Palestine Arabs. The affluent Muslim elite
from poor nations who migrated to the West usually are too sophisticated
to expose their inner glee at a triumph for the Muslim world. Usually,
their emotions in favour of Palestinians comes across as their love for
humanity because usually it is Palestinian “civilians” who die, not a
thousand Israelis. Habituated to operating under the cloak of empathy,
Fatima Bhutto reposted an activist’s tweet, “It must be emphasised that
armed struggle by the Palestinian resistance against the occupier is
legal under international law.” Other people with facades of modernity
said similar things. Many refined people with Muslim names, in a
remarkable coincidence, blamed Israel for the violence. All this not
even a day since the massacre, which had the effect of endorsing Hamas’s
action. Some students of Harvard signed a joint letter condemning
Israel. The wokes are the petition-signing zombies of the new world. In
my experience, wokes are people so bereft of innate morality that they
have to make bad guesses about what goodness might be.

All sane people have the same values, certainly, but it is the secret
hierarchy in which we hold them that distinguishes us. Even atheists
have a religious identity, especially Muslim atheists, and in the past
few days, it appeared that they hold that identity more dear than their
love for unbranded human lives. Yet, the global Muslim identity has been
useless to Palestinians. No one wants them in their backyard; they only
“stand with Palestine”. Palestinians have gained less from Muslim
sympathy than from the crumbs falling off Israel’s capitalism. All that
the Muslim identity has done is stoke the violence and give Palestinians
the false hope that if some of them keep getting blown off, one day
Palestine will be theirs.

Back home, the Indian National Congress is afraid to condemn Hamas. Amid
all this, many Hindus have been wishing for Israel to obliterate Gaza as
though it is just a video game. Across the world, people who hate Islam
have donned the cloak of humanism to ask Israel for a spectacular
retribution. Israel has no choice but to do something of that sort, and
we know that its people will once again pay the price.

The way the world uses the word “civilians” to describe most
Palestinians, it is as though everyone except me has a secret way to
distinguish who there belongs to Hamas and who is an innocent victim.
Maybe what the world is trying to say is that most humans are not
terrorists; they may now and then celebrate murder, but they are not
directly barbarians. I can’t argue with that.

But I do wonder what was running in the heads of Palestinian “civilians”
in 2006 when over 44% of them elected Hamas to power in elections
considered free and fair. More important is the fact that the
Palestinians did pay the price for that mistake. They have directly
borne the effects of Israeli colonisation. Their children have died,
their lovers have died, they have no hope, no future. Of all the
“civilians” in the world, they have paid the highest price. Their
emotions have meaning. Even when they rejoiced the massacre of a
thousand people.

It would be fascinating to know what they have to say about the rich
Palestinian Arabs who had the means to escape, who settled in the West,
and who goad poor Palestinians to fight from faraway. The long-distance
Asian feudal lords in the West who want to hire martyrs, we know them.
We have seen the displaced Sri Lankan Tamil elite funding the LTTE. When
the violent end came for hundreds of impoverished Tamil “civilians”, the
emotional elite were safely in England and other such places. We have
seen the affluent Kashmiris in Dubai and New York goad impoverished
Kashmiris to become militants or at least stone-pelters; they defamed
every local Kashmiri who wished for peace. We have seen some Canadians
of Punjabi origin destroy whole generations in Punjab. And, we have seen
non resident Indians celebrate the rise of a new Hindu India.

But I see the long-distance Jewish identity very differently. Even
before Adolf Hitler, they were massacred across Europe. Driven from all
lands, they hid in something called assimilation. But then some of them
had the bizarre idea of colonizing a piece of Arab land. Of course, they
took it from poor Arab farmers, who were though treated worse by richer
Arabs. And suddenly there was a Jewish land. Everything that happens to
Israel and everything Israel does affect the fates of every Semitic Jew
anywhere. We will realize this in the coming days when there are stray
“lone-wolf” attacks on Jews in some of the most advanced cities of the
world.
