# Kamala Harris inspires us but don’t ask us to explain

*2024-07-28*

Three kinds of people will extol her because they would misunderstand
her as a beacon of hope and pride. The most obvious would be Indians who
would celebrate once again the notion that she is of ‘Indian origin’
because her mother was from Tamil Nadu. 

The celebration of foreigners of ‘Indian origin’ is among the silliest
things Indians do. It is as though the Indian links of successful
foreigners somehow demonstrates that Indians have respectable genes.

But there is a more erroneous idea that Harris inspires and it is more
sophisticated than the absurd pride of Indians in foreigners who look a
bit like them. There is a broad consensus in America that the Indian
community succeeds in America because of something that Indians do in an
Indian way, something abstractly but innately Indian. 

Americans of ‘Indian origin’ like this view. They use their general
success to subtly and bluntly admonish African-Americans and other
communities and tell them that the secret of success in America is very
simply valiant human virtues. This is nonsense. 

Indians appear to do well compared to other communities because the
first wave of Indian migrants were the social and economic upper class
back home. They were the Caucasians of their native lands. In fact, they
could migrate to the US precisely because they were a part of the
elite. 

It was an extension of their privileges. In fact, by virtue of being
born in the right homes, they had a head-start not only against most
Indians, but also most Americans. This is what they never tell
African-Americans.

Some Indians in America may point out that they emerged from what they
claim are “humble backgrounds." For instance, the CEO of Alphabet, which
owns Google, Sundar Pichai has said, “My father spent the equivalent of
a year’s salary on my plane ticket to the US so I could attend Stanford.
It was my first time ever on a plane. Without all that, I wouldn’t be
here today." 

This, in fact, shows that he probably belonged to the top 1% of Indians
at the time. Around the time Pichai took his first flight, Indians were
so poor that if a man’s yearly salary was as much as a plane ticket to
the US, he was in a position to favour his children in ways a majority
of Indians could not. And that head-start is not a trivial thing.

The mother of Kamala Harris, Shyamala, too, though not royalty, was a
beneficiary of belonging to the upper class in a poor country—a fortune
that helped her migrate, legally.

When Donald Trump was president, he opened a broadside against migrants
in America. His concern was entirely the poor among migrants. His
actions created a moral counterforce, and influential people of ‘Indian
origin,’ including Kamala Harris, spoke against his policies. 

They gave the impression that migrants were a single collective block of
an identical class. But in reality, they had more in common with
privileged Americans than the poor migrants who smuggle themselves into
America.

The third group of people who may see a bit too much in Harris are
women. But then, the success of Kamala Harris is not an indicator that
the time has come for women to have a fair chance at success. 

She is a sign of something more pedestrian, which is that upper-class
women have greater opportunities today to trounce upper-class men. The
fact that women identify with her because she is a woman will make no
difference in a world where the odds are stacked against most women.

A few hours before I began writing this column, during the filming of
the Olympic torch relay, Salma Hayek did a good cartwheel. She did it
exactly like the little girls in my park. She is 57. And that may have
brought a flutter to the hearts of many 57-year-olds, even though they
can barely run up a flight of steps and they know they are never going
to do a cartwheel in their lives. 

Hayek demonstrates that there are things you can do at 57 if you live
the right way. But that is not going to happen to most people. They felt
a flutter because they identified with her age, that is all. There is
something human about identifying with someone in a similar
circumstance. It is human, but also absurd. 

The fact that Salma Hayek can do something at 57 portents absolutely
nothing for millions of 57-year-olds in the world. Similarly, what some
fortunate women like Kamala Harris can do portents nothing for most
women in the world. Unlucky women have more in common with unlucky men.

A more meaningful inspiration for women across the world are female
athletes from nations like India, where they face enormous odds in their
formative years. They are jeered at by their families, communities and
even coaches. India gives them almost nothing; India is in fact their
adversity. Yet, they are so innately talented that they triumph.

I wish I could say that the lesson here is that if you are a very
talented girl in an objective field, even India cannot stop you. But the
real lesson, instead, is that for the poor to triumph, first the field
should be beyond the interest or capabilities of the upper class, like
sports. 

And second, men should not be in the fray. That would make the
conditions ripe for true social justice to occur. Otherwise, it is just
the 98th percentile beating the 99th, and calling it storming the
bastion.
