# The true meaning of ‘misanthrope’ can be found in a comedy series

*2024-02-12*

In Curb Your Enthusiasm, a series created by Larry David, he plays a
melodramatic version of what he claims is his real self. Once, he
encounters a large woman in a shelter for battered women and he suspects
she is lying about her trauma because she is so physically imposing no
man could have battered her. Another day, he appoints an
African-American man to behave poorly with Caucasians, on his behalf. At
the peak of the \#MeToo movement in America, when Larry David finds a
date, he persuades her to appear on tape with him giving him consent to
get physical. Also, he woos a disabled woman to get ahead in queues and
ends up cheating on her with another disabled woman.

The twelfth and final season of the cult sitcom dropped a few days ago.
Long before that, Larry David has been celebrated for all that is great
about him. Except one thing—he is not hailed enough for unintentionally
introducing to the modern world the most sensible meaning of the word
‘misanthrope.’

There is a corrupt side to language, especially English, which has words
that do not exist in most languages. Through labels, it simplifies
complexity, and at times manufactures ideas that do no exist (just about
anything that ends with ‘ism’). Among its odd words is ‘misanthrope,’
which dictionaries interpret as “hater of mankind." It is not an obscure
word at all. Yet, its dictionary meaning is obscure. “Hater of mankind."
Who hates humans, really? People do say that, but without seriousness.
Larry David himself says that. Yet, he is a man who loves his friends,
and even an ex-wife. No one truly knows the meaning of ‘hating humans.’
At best, it is a lament. Or there could be a form of mental illness that
makes some people despise humans.

But ‘misanthrope’ always had a potential meaning that could describe
more than six weird people, it could describe a human state. Its true
meaning lay hidden for centuries as it was appropriated by misguided
linguists who were confused by too much knowledge of Greek etymology.

The true meaning of ‘misanthrope’ was prophesied by a broad type of
people. They did not hate humans; they had contempt or just amusement
for what humans did. The contemptuous and the amused are two different
types of misanthropes. Both can have astonishing clarity about humans
because they find a way to observe their species from the outside, but
only one of them is a natural storyteller. The contemptuous artist is a
bore, but the amused observer of the herd is interesting to the whole
herd.

Misanthropy, as a general frustration with society, is more mainstream
than it appears at first glance. What else is the government’s
family-planning policy but a form of misanthropy?

Environmentalism is mostly misanthropy. Also smart investing. You do
make money going by the wisdom of crowds, but you make much more if you
know when to bet against the herd. Also, a good diet is a misanthropic
diet. If you don’t eat how most people do, it usually means you have
intelligent eating habits. There is a reason why the best way to
irritate relatives is to follow a healthy diet. It makes them feel that
you are abandoning them as they sink into their slow deaths.

A person who is suspicious of the majority condition deserves a word
that means more than a “hater of mankind," who may not even exist. The
misanthrope is not a psychopath (who too may not exist but that’s for
another day). Everyday misanthropes can see clearly the absurdities of
herd behaviour.

Across the ages, misanthropes were among the most influential people.
The distant amused observer is a common trope in the arts. Comedians
have used it for long. Jerry Seinfeld and Larry David tapped it for the
comedy Seinfeld. The misanthrope is the soul of Fleabag, a comedy about
reasonless grief. But the ‘misanthrope’ was never clearly marked and
named until someone used it to promote Curb Your Enthusiasm. Larry David
thus became not only the most famous ‘misanthrope’ in the world but also
one who was most likely to actually exist. His mistrust of human beings
makes him see through their facades. In one episode, Larry David
discovers something only he could have—that a hip restaurant gives the
best seats to attractive people and hides other people, like him, in the
back.

Misanthropy is also a layer of morality. Once, in the series, Larry
David hires a garish street sex worker so that he can use the car-pool
lane that is unavailable to solo drivers. This is a truly egalitarian
man, who only sees where he wishes to go and not a class hierarchy. He
gets into a lot of trouble because of her, but treats her as an equal
all through. Another time, he discovers a Palestinian restaurant that
serves the best chicken he has ever eaten. This discovery is bad news
for some adulterous Jews who have been bringing their lovers here,
confident that they will never be seen by other Jews. Larry David
invites a Jewish friend there who arrives in a yamaka (Jewish cap). As
the man approaches, Larry David, who is Jewish himself, figures that he
would be debarred from the diner if the Palestinians see him with such a
conservative Jew. He has to choose between chicken and Jewish pride. It
is a no-contest. He wrestles his friend outside the restaurant to remove
his yamaka. Palestinians inside the restaurant watch, baffled, and Larry
David becomes their hero. A true misanthrope upsets his own tribe more
often than his historic foes.

So often in real life, the misanthrope is an accidental humanitarian,
and people who call themselves ‘humanists’ are dangerous.
