# The fabled charms of heritage red-light areas are bogus

*2024-05-12*

I was in Pakistan in 2004 to cover a historic cricket series. In Lahore,
it was inevitable that someone would offer to take me to Heera Mandi. By
then, the place had gentrified enough for the offer to be respectable,
but still something of its ‘red-light’ part was alive enough for Indian
cricketers not to visit, at least publicly. For instance, Rahul Dravid,
who had thrilled Pakistanis by demonstrating his curiosity by visiting
Mohenjo Daro, stayed away from Heera Mandi.

I was a bit nervous because of an incident a few days earlier. I had
noticed that on street corners, hawkers sold pornographic CDs
whispering, “Indian, Indian." Mystified, I asked what happened to
Pakistani films. Such a thing, I soon understood, was not asked even by
locals. 

No matter the actual provenance of the movies on sale, they were all
called ‘Indian.’ Worse, it was clear I was Indian. I had to leave
immediately. So I wondered how an average Pakistani on the street in
Heera Mandi would react to an Indian entering a house of ill-repute. I
wondered how long I would take to say in Hindi that I was there just for
the dance performances, assuming that was okay.

At the time of my visit, and probably even now, Heera Mandi was bustling
with life till the early hours, which was not unusual for Lahore because
it had a thriving late-dining scene, probably to compensate for having
no public drinking. Lahore had places that looked like pubs, where a
hunk in a small tee would sit on a high stool, holding a mug, but with
cola inside. 

Its restaurant scene, though, was way ahead of Delhi’s or Mumbai’s.
There was a place where you could eat as many groundnuts as you wanted
and throw their shells on the floor, while Pakistanis dressed as cowboys
gave you dirty looks to sustain the cowboy theme.

There were such posh restaurants in and around Heera Mandi. As I got
talking to the locals there, an odd recurring element emerged. Several
people claimed to be descendants of famous Pakistani men in history who
had visited Heera Mandi. Now, Pakistanis are among the funniest people I
know, so I wonder if that was a part of their poker-faced humour or they
were trying to con a journalist. Or were they serious?

Heera Mandi was a network of narrow lanes near a mosque built by
Aurangzeb. Music filled the air. Flanking the lanes were old houses with
little rooms filled with dozens of people watching Indian cable TV,
except news channels, which were banned. In some rooms, three TV sets
played with the audio of all at high volume. 

I was taken to one such room, where there were some musicians and a
decorated young woman in a kurta and churidaar. I had recently learnt
the difference between a churidaar and salwaar. A Pakistani fashion
designer had told me that Indians didn’t know how to cut a churidaar and
Pakistanis didn’t know how to cut a salwaar.

When I entered, the musicians came alive, and they shut the doors, of
which there were several. And suddenly, we were alone with them and the
woman in a room. They began to play what to my South Indian ears was
nautch-girl music, and the woman began to dance in a ridiculous fashion,
as though she was a feminist mocking me. It was the opposite of
seduction. 

But then, even done right, that is the dance of nautch girls. She
twirled, and we arrived at a Mughal cultural mystery. When you twirl,
the kurta’s hem forms a ring. What was the big deal? It was just
physics. Why was this some cultural high-point? I had seen the twirl in
Mughal-e-Azam, and I am certain it is there in Bhansali’s films. The
woman in the room kept dancing. I was 29, and I was bored.

Maybe I had been sucked into a tourist trap. Maybe behind some other
door, there was something more sensuous, something straight out of a
Hindi film. From what I could see, Heera Mandi was dull, and it was not
as though I was from an exciting place—I lived in Mumbai then. I
wondered where all the history had gone. 

People had told me that Heera Mandi was once filled with the most
beautiful women in the world. And that they were well-versed in many
arts. For some mysterious reason, courtesans in many countries were
intellectually versatile, as though that was what men who went to
red-light districts wanted—the renaissance woman.

In that place, there was no history. Of the history I had heard and
read, there was no influence. Do historians overrate history? In many
places, history is the first thing that goes. It erodes almost at the
speed of time. Heritage survives only in all the things that are dear to
the elite. Everywhere else, people don’t own their heritage, no matter
how beautiful it is, and they replace it with something modern and
grotesque.

Bhansali is often accused of making the past more beautiful than it was
and his characters more spectacular than real. But there is a Bhansali
in everyone who takes a tour of an old red-light district. There is
something bogus about its charms, maybe because the people who love dead
red-light districts would never tolerate a live red-light district. They
are more in love with the deceased part than the red-light part. They
wish to borrow some safe notoriety, or safe seediness, to make up for
bad overpriced food.
