# The world is in the grip of some fierce delusions

*2024-10-06*

The film probably triggered a mass googling of ‘Folie à Deux,’ which
means ‘madness of two,’ a phenomenon that is more formally known as
shared delusion. 

So, what was an unspoken flaw in the first Joker is spelt out more
clearly in the sequel. The flaw is that it portrays its central
character as crazy. Great stories never do that, even though they are
all about madness.

The madness of the mad looks like madness; the madness of the ‘sane’ is
heroic. And infectious. From the propensity of the world to be infected
by what doesn’t look like madness come our enduring abstractions.

Folie à Deux is a phenomenon in which a person with a powerful delusion
transfers it to another person, who then begins to see a version of the
delusion. The relationship is not equal (assuming that there really are
‘equal’ relationships). 

Usually, the person who transmits the delusion (‘the primary’) is
severely delusional and the receiver is someone with the potential to
receive delusions upon contact with a ‘primary.’

Then, together they believe in the same vision and corroborate it for
each other. In the film, the Joker passes on his delusion to a woman who
then amplifies it.

Shared delusion is all around us. A person begins to hear voices and a
family member then begins to hear the same. A man believes a politician
is an incarnation of divinity and someone else, or even the whole
family, begins to believe in that. Most instances of shared delusion are
so common and ordinary that they are categorized as human nature. Some
ideologies, for instance.

There is also ‘folie à plusieurs,’ or the ‘madness of many,’ where a
single person infects many. But this too is common; we have to only
think of ancient irrational ideas that have endured and still hold sway
over the world. 

Anyone can see the ‘madness of many,’ except in the case of his own
beliefs. Sanity is simply not the majority condition of the world.
Mostly, the infection is very mild. But sometimes we get to see how
powerful a shared delusion can be.

In 2018, a man in Delhi convinced 11 members of his prosperous household
to hang themselves along with him. Until that day, they were known to
their neighbours and friends as just a regular family. The dead belonged
to a wide age group—there were teens, the young, the middle-aged and a
very old woman. 

The primary influencer was the head of the family—somehow, he persuaded
his family to stand on stools with nooses around their necks and hands
bound. 

Maybe they were led to believe that if they merely stood this way, they
would experience something supernatural after which they could just step
down from the stools. 

But they would dangle like the veins of a banyan tree, which was the
specific stated objective of ‘the primary.’ (Only 10 died by hanging.
The old woman probably could not get on a stool, so she was helpfully
strangled in another room.) This is a world where it is hard to sell a
Netflix subscription. Yet, a man could convince his entire household to
hang themselves.

Instances of mass hysteria too may emerge from the same phenomenon, with
a single source. Usually, because of the sheer number of people who are
infected, which could be in hundreds, the primary source is hard to
identify. 

As it happened in Haryana in 2017, when hundreds of women across the
state believed that someone had chopped their hair when they woke up
from sleep or after a blackout.

Joker: Folie à Deux is not only about the shared delusion between a man
and a woman, but also his influence on society. A type of people who are
primed to receive a convenient or fantastic delusion begin to see what
‘the primary’ sees. 

These are probably people in poor mental health, whose condition is made
worse by traumas and failures. And they begin to see in a madman a
revolutionary. As we can guess from the history of the real world, they
are never really saved. They then move on to another delusional hero.

How is it that a vast number of people claim to ‘understand’ a madman?
They don’t. They, in fact, misunderstand. Madmen, by nature, are never
clear. 

They leave enough ambiguity for people to impose their own ideas on
another person. And what we are all in love with is our own ideas, even
if they are projected on another person.

This is why good scientists almost never become mass heroes, while
actors do. There are, of course, some exceptions like Albert Einstein,
but he was rare. Scientists are very clear about their ideas, so there
is very little room for misinterpretation. 

On the other hand, many superstar actors, including those who are not
identified as actors, are fluid. They are not what people think they
are. This is not a deceit. It is just the way they are; that is their
real talent. 

People see what they want to see in them. It appears that even when ‘the
primary’ is not delusional, he can transmit a delusion to a wide range
of people.

In comparison, sanity has no influence. The world does make it look as
though its beliefs have come from deep debate, that we took all
arguments into account and weighed each angle to arrive at our beliefs,
In fact, the inverse is true. People believe what they want to believe
and then look for proof. Often, they find it in a person who says
ambiguous things.

The world has always been in the fierce grip of the madness of two. Most
of the world’s Jokers are revered.
