# Why human health is more than a behaviour problem

*2024-07-14*

American tech billionaires are trying to make death obsolete. After all,
death is nature’s technology, and the fate of all tech is to become
obsolete one day. I would never mock them because I have great hope in
the self-interest of rich people. 

Their desire to live forever, or at least for very long, has made the
health of all humans, even those who are not millionaires, the emotional
goal of modern science; everything else is just business. Not
surprisingly, the hype of this decade, AI, is at the core of most
attempts.

A few days ago, the founder of Huffington Post, Arianna Huffington, and
the CEO of OpenAI, Sam Altman, announced a venture that they say will
solve one of the biggest practical problems in health today, which is
that most advice is too general to be relevant to an individual. 

Their Thrive Ai Health plans to change the behaviour of people by giving
information that is highly specific to the person who is using the app.
“AI, by using the power of hyper-personalization, can significantly
improve these behaviours," they wrote in an essay in Time magazine.

They make two assumptions. One is that people want to be healthy. The
second is that people give truthful information about themselves to an
app, in private. It may seem obvious that both these assumptions are
correct, but humans are so twisted that they may not be right. 

For instance, people lie about their diet even on surveys that do not
ask for their identity, probably because they find truths about
themselves unpleasant. This, according to longevity specialist Peter
Attia, is a reason why he does not take most diet research seriously.

The other assumption, that people want to be healthy, has a layer of
truth, but it does not matter. What people want often has nothing to do
with what they actually do because what they do is subject to a secret
hierarchy of things that they hold dear. People want to be healthy, but
what they want more is to eat tasty food, three times a day, every day
of the week.

Huffington and Altman assume that the reason most people are unhealthy
is that they are unable to change their behaviour, and that is because
they don’t have good information about themselves.

While it is true that most health advice is general, it is also true
that general advice is mostly good. Stay away from sugar, exercise, be
active and don’t be a glutton. There’s nothing in this that can harm
anybody, and it has nothing that will not do some good to most people.
Yet, most people are not able to change their behaviour, and this is not
because an app didn’t send a notification asking them to avoid that
third bottle of soda. They are in the grip of human nature.

What is the true nature of people? The question is an obsession with
Western anthropology, and the answers are usually qualities that people
do not exhibit. There is a lot of talk about “hunting" and “gathering."
“Picking berries," figures a lot. But then the greatest evidence of what
people really are lies in how they are, how they exist. Not in what they
stop doing the moment they get a chance.

The reason most people are unhealthy is that it’s hard work to go
against human nature, and against an evolutionary drawback—that we
evolved for scarcity. To live in plenty and behave as though there is
scarcity is to be a philosopher. This is impossible for most people.

The solution to the global pandemic of poor health is something that’s
kinder than asking people to change. It’s a pill.

Or some other form of drug. A direct medical intervention is the true
equalizer that can help most people achieve what is possible only for
some. On this, science does not offer any immediate hope.

Science, in fact, is the most overrated of human pursuits. Medicine,
especially, has been a big failure. It is true that modern medicine has
increased the quality of information and debunked many of its own myths,
and ensured that billions of babies have lived, but its greatest
achievements concern prolonging death and not prolonging life. 

People are living much longer, but they are not living with the zest of
their ancestors. People are living in a manner that is exactly the wrong
way to die. Personally, I would rather leap off a cliff heroically than
live the way most people in this world live.

This will not be changed by an app that uses spurious personal data to
ask people to go against their will and do difficult things like eat
bland food, swim or lift weights. The only way most people will live
healthy old ages is if there is a pill that not only prolongs their
death, but also their youth.

There is another reason why medicine has disappointed, and this is an
unsung reason. Parents have become kinder to children and they are given
freedoms to avoid dreary career paths, like hard sciences. 

Just as the sciences once stole our school geniuses from the arts, then
technology stole them from the sciences, something else is stealing them
from both tech and sciences. If geniuses are not forced to toil in
dreary scientific careers early in their lives, we are in trouble.

But then, there might be compensation in the form of AI. Through its
brute ability to make numerous permutations and combinations, hundreds
of labs across the world are searching for a way to help people live the
wrong way, yet die the right way.
