# Why there’s a clash over classifying an athlete as female

*2024-08-11*

The people who run global sports and those who frame mainstream decency
have since defended Khelif vehemently. As far as the Olympics are
concerned, Khelif is a woman because she says she is one and her
passport says so. 

On her part, she has never revealed details that can put the matter to
rest. For instance, if she has XX chromosomes, there can be no further
argument.

Almost all humans have 46 chromosomes in every cell and they exist as 23
pairs. The 23rd pair is of sex chromosomes. Depending on your age, you
may or may not have learnt in school that a woman is considered a person
whose 23rd pairing of sex chromosomes are XX and a man is one whose are
XY. But this is not the scientific opinion anymore.

For clarity, I will refer to humans who have XX pairing as ‘XX’ and
those with XY pairing as ‘XY.’ This is how things stand today: All men
are XY but not all XY are men; and all XX are women but not all women
are XX.

This means there are XY women. They have many attributes of most women,
even reproductive structures. Also, they consider themselves women. But
their condition may give them high testosterone levels that are in the
range observed in men. 

Testosterone greatly contributes to muscle size and strength, and create
other features that help in sports. How much the hormone contributes to
sporting prowess and in which sport is a matter of debate, but there is
no doubt that its high level is useful.

So there has for long been a debate around whether women who have XY
chromosomes should be allowed to compete against ‘normal’ women. There
are powerful arguments on both sides.

A sporting contest is primarily a measure of physical inequalities. When
seen that way, all great sporting geniuses are physical freaks. Why
shouldn’t the Y chromosome in a woman and her high testosterone be
considered ingredients of genius? 

Sports are also a measure of economic disparity. The boxer who
surrendered to Khelif was from Italy, which is many times richer than
Algeria, where Khelif was raised by a family of modest means. Who is to
tell which is a greater unfair advantage—the backing of an advanced
European nation or a Y-chromosome?

The Olympics are also a moral festival. The International Olympic
Committee (IOC) gives precedence to freedom of participation and the
framing of the world as a decent place that does not discriminate based
on who you are.

In any case, the IOC has tried hard to be fair to XX women, those who
are widely considered ‘normal women.’ For instance, it requires XY women
to have low testosterone levels or to medicate themselves to bring down
those levels. 

But women with XX chromosomes do not have a cap on testosterone levels.
However, I don’t think the world knows of a single XX woman who has
male-range testosterone levels.

Also, in aquatics, apart from requiring XY women to have low
testosterone, transgenders who went through puberty as males are not
allowed to compete. So, it is not as though the IOC has not tried hard
to be fair to XX women.

There are equally powerful arguments against the decency of the
Olympics, why it is important to define women, and why the world should
stop pretending that there is no such thing as a ‘normal woman.’ In
pursuit of decency, the mainstream tends to go overboard in denying
normality, ending up putting a majority at a disadvantage. 

This is happening with XY women. Ten years ago, anecdotally, the biggest
champions of transgenders, XY women, or women with differences in sex
development, or simply women who didn’t look like women, were ‘normal’
XX women. But now I see a shift.

When a minority grows stronger, easy compassion for them dries up. There
can be no moral argument in favour of the view that XY women should not
be considered women. Only practical.

For instance, consider the nature of influence. Why are there separate
tournaments and grading systems for women in chess? Isn’t that an insult
in a mental sport? 

But if you have a daughter, you will understand why it makes a lot of
sense. The sport’s organizers are trying to create female chess icons
and encourage more girls to play. We are inspired by people who look
like us, or who are us. Girls are inspired women.

In physical sports, there is already a feeling among gifted XX girls, in
their formative years of athleticism, that they don’t stand a chance
against women whose chromosomes differ. 

In many physical sports, XY women are set to change how future female
sporting icons are going to look. This can create a scarcity of ‘normal
women’ in some sports. 

People can say decent things, and maybe they should, but people do feel
a lot of things that may not be decent yet are human nature. And I do
believe that XX girls are more inspired by XX women than XY.

On many turfs of women, what creeps in and colonizes are not the ploys
of patriarchs, but a certain soft maleness.
