# Is there a meaningful issue that could anger Indians?

*2024-02-19*

The bond, which was sold in various denominations by the State Bank of
India (SBI), could be bought by an Indian citizen, corporation or other
type of organization, and deposited in the account of a legitimate
political party that secured at least 1% of the votes polled in the last
general or a state election. It enabled the donor to pay any amount to a
political party and remain anonymous. Anonymous to us, that is, the
citizens.

The government defended the anonymity of the donor stating that we had
no business knowing everything. It even defended the anonymity of the
donor in court. Attorney General of India R. Ventakaramani said there
“can be no general right to know anything and everything without being
subjected to reasonable restrictions."

Yet there was no public rage over electoral bonds. People did not hit
the streets screaming how can they be kept in the dark about those
donating crores to political parties, apparently out of unconditional
love. They did not ask who the donors were and why were they donating,
or what were they getting in return.

We can expect supporters of the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) to
be quiet, but a majority of Indians are not BJP voters. Yet, there was
no real public ire.

It was not public sentiment that made the Supreme Court look into
electoral bonds. The court was hearing a clutch of petitions filed by
activists and the Congress, which received only a small fraction of what
the BJP received from electoral bonds. As the BJP transmits an aura of
permanence in Delhi and grows stronger in states, anonymous donations to
the party would have grown many times, making it even more formidable at
the polls. The Indian public did nothing to kill the bonds. If it were
not for a few activists and a party fighting for its survival, all major
parties would have continued to get crores from donors whose identity
would never have been revealed.

It is difficult to make a wide section of Indians angry about useful
things. Practically, when it comes to issues that affect their quality
of life, there is no public rage in India. In its defence of electoral
bonds, the government officially claimed that the donors were anonymous
even to their beneficiaries, the political parties. As though it is very
hard for a person who is sending an enormous sum to a political party
‘anonymously’ to intimate someone in the party that some money is coming
its way.

The idea of the electoral bond was introduced by the late Arun Jaitley,
a BJP leader and lawyer. He said that this device would eliminate black
money from political donations and guard the identity of virtuous
donors.

Anonymity, Jaitley had claimed, would protect the donor from political
vendetta. So, in the national interest, the anonymity of donors had to
be preserved. Last week, the Supreme Court dismissed this view.

The Supreme Court has directed the State Bank of India to reveal the
identities of donors and the details of bond encashment by political
parties. If this actually happens, patterns of quid pro quo may emerge
that would be fascinating.

However, even if some startling patterns come to light, there will
probably be no public outrage in the country. Just as there is no public
rage against lethal bad air, traffic congestion, rampant petty
corruption in government offices across the nation and the pathetic
quality of life in all major Indian cities.

There are, of course, signs of localized public anger about very
specific issues. As I write this column, farmers from Punjab are
agitating in and around Delhi, seeking better prices for their crops
from the government.

A few days ago, a few politicians from the South had made symbolic
protests in Delhi against the Centre, accusing it of treating states
that are not governed by the BJP poorly. But these do not constitute
public rage by the standards of Indians who have in the past protested
forcefully against caste-based reservations and on matters of religion.
Somehow, issues like the probable misuse of electoral bonds and air
quality have never stirred public emotion, at least not in a highly
visible or audible way.

Even what is called the anti-corruption movement of 2010 was never
really against corruption. It began as an anti-politician sentiment in
2008, after ten terrorists attacked Mumbai. And it slowly revealed
itself as an anti-Congress nationalistic movement that expressed a
farcical collective shock at the level of corruption in India, as though
it was something new.

Public anger in India is fragmented, and when it does have national
scale, it is usually over tired social issues.

It is possible that mass disenchantment in India is never obvious until
the results of a general election are announced. That is one way a
modern democracy expresses its anger. By voting. But then, in the past
ten years, especially during national elections to the Lok Sabha, it
appears that most of India has reached some kind of an emotional
Zen-like equilibrium, as though the country has solved all its major
problems.
