# How could a startup religion succeed in ancient times?

*2024-09-29*

But what exactly was this influence? It was chiefly science and
Buddhism, though Dalrymple’s enjoyable book cites other contributions
too. Of these two influences, it is easier to understand how Indian
science could have influenced the rest of the world. There is a
universality to scientific logic. 

For instance, when Arab mathematicians, and the more backward Europeans,
were grappling with an unwieldy way of writing numbers, it would have
taken them just one glance at the decimal system to recognize its
genius.

It is more difficult to get how Buddhism, which began in India, spread
across most of Asia and across eras when the hold of entrenched
religions was so strong.

I believe that in ancient times, a new religion could survive its
infancy because it wasn’t perceived as a faith as such, but as something
mystical. 

Religious and caste identities were so branded into the souls of people
that they weren’t threatened at all by a new philosophical idea. In
fact, they barely noticed the religion of foreigners. 

Dalrymple points out that when Muslim merchants first arrived in India,
they were almost never referred to by their religion, instead they were
described by their languages and appearance, as though they were more
significant markers. 

Their alien faith was not their defining characteristic. People who knew
only one religion might have seen any new spiritual or philosophical or
humane concept as something outside religion that they could in fact
adopt without having to renounce their primary faith.

But there was another factor why Buddhism survived its early stages when
it was only known vaguely as “the teachings." The cultural elite of the
time found it fashionable to adopt it. It is likely these elites didn’t
think they were abandoning their original faith.

In the India of the 6th century BCE, there was a spiritual explosion.
Many charismatic seers sprung up and had extraordinary followings. One
of them was Mahavira. 

He had a big influence on Siddhartha, who, though often referred to as a
prince, was probably the son of a wealthy tribal chieftain. Siddhartha
wondered about the meaning of life and set out on a difficult journey of
discovery.

He attempted extreme asceticism, which included starving for long
periods of time, coming very close to death, and meditating motionless.
But then he began to preach the moderate “middle road." 

This idea became popular, especially among the cultural elite, who were
his first disciples. Even as they became his followers and evangelists,
it is probable that they did not renounce Hinduism. A similar phenomenon
occurred in Kerala, where some Brahmins are said to have become
Christian. 

Today, many of Kerala’s upper-class Christian overtly or discreetly
believe they have Brahmin ancestry. The scale of this conversion may not
be true, but there is good evidence to suggest that at least some
Brahmins did become Christian.

Why would someone at the top of the social order do that? Because he was
not really renouncing his faith or caste. Christianity, like Buddhism,
was probably a fashionable idea at the time in Kerala.

In Buddha’s era, many sects rose. Historian Abraham Eraly wrote there
were probably more than 30, but only Buddhism and Jainism endured.
Buddha himself appears to have faded from Indian memory. 

If we know him, it is because of his late acolyte, Emperor Ashoka, who
created enduring objects that told the story as a part of his
evangelism. But then, despite the backing of a great Indian emperor,
Buddhism began to fade in India. 

No one can explain. The only reason that makes sense to me is that as
Buddhism grew strong, it finally became a distinct religion and then
Hinduism’s dominance asserted itself.

Dalrymple points out that after Ashoka, “…counter-intuitively, for a
faith that embraced poverty and renunciation as an ideal, it was spread
around the globe most effectively by wealthy merchants engaged in
trade." This is not counter-intuitive at all. 

It is natural that Buddhism would be spread by the economic elite, given
its provenance. Is there any successful religion that was not at first
promoted by the elite? Or any sphere of human life; even a sport?

After surviving its infancy, the next phase of a new mystical idea
depends heavily on how the society’s second rung uses it to challenge
the top rung. Buddhism, as a humane religion, could have been the
perfect tool of rich middle castes against the priestly class. 

But it did not work out that way. It declined in India. But it would
thrive in China, first as a mystical idea brought by Indian merchants
and monks that aligned well with principles of the entrenched Daoism,
and later as a moral weapon of new aristocrats who wanted to replace the
religion of a vanquished empire.

Why don’t we see new religions today? Has the time of religion passed? I
don’t think that is the case. New religions are all around us, they just
don’t look like religion yet. They exist as moral ideas, if not
mystical. 

Many centuries later, dominant religions would probably involve the
fierce adoration of nature, or maybe a theological veneration of
socialism. Their seeds are already here. And like Buddhism of a time,
they do not appear to threaten any incumbent religion.
