# Nobody told us that Kashmiris are also ‘polarized’

*2024-09-22*

But that does not mean it is true. It only means that in such societies,
the cultural elite and old money still control the media, that the
loudest voice belongs to one type of people and the world has heard only
their side of the story.

It simply cannot be that anywhere in the world, the elite and others
have the same politics, especially over a long period of time. This
includes Kashmir, which is in the process of electing an assembly for
the first time in 10 years. 

Yet, you may think ordinary Kashmiris have the same views as activists
who write opinions for foreign media—that they would rather fight India
than move on with their lives. This is not true. 

Some people who have good lives in or far away from Kashmir, who do not
require ‘normalcy,’ may want revolution. But, from what I have seen,
most ordinary people of Kashmir just want to move on.

Societies often exist with opposing views. In fact, this is a natural
way for any society to be. When we see political change, it means that
one side, especially the one which knows words like ‘polarization,’ has
lost its power to tell a biased story. For some time now, Kashmir, too,
has held contrasting views. We were not told of that.

Over the years, we were told that Kashmiris faced one bad option and a
good option. The ‘bad’ option was acceptance of India. The ‘good’ option
was ‘freedom,’ by which they either meant freedom from India and
alignment with Pakistan, or freedom from India to become an independent
sovereign Islamic nation wedged between India, Pakistan and China. 

We were told that what Kashmiris really wanted was, miraculously, the
same as what much of their elite wanted—freedom from India. This has not
been true for some time.

I gather that Kashmiris are very excited about the elections. The voter
turnout has been very good. The Indian government claims that this
enthusiasm is proof that they are ready and eager to be assimilated into
the Indian Union, contrary to what their cultural elites propagate. 

Even so, many Kashmiris are disappointed with the Indian government for
reinforcing control upon the Valley by abrogating a constitutional
provision and ending Kashmir’s statehood. 

Both these views mask the real point that Kashmir’s ordinary people have
for long tried to make, which is that they are ready to move on. They
have been stuck in time for decades as the world moved ahead. While they
may not see Indian control as ideal for emotional reasons, it is the
most practical outcome.

Twelve years ago, I visited Kashmir during an extraordinary period of
peace and optimism there. Eventually, I would write a story for Open
magazine entitled, “Sorry, Kashmir is happy." Most of the people I met
were ordinary folk. 

In the beginning, they said the usual things about how angry they are
with India for everything it did to keep Kashmir in its hold. But
eventually, they said that they were tired of Kashmir being a place
where there was no economic activity or fun. 

They were willing to move on, which was a euphemism for accepting what
their parents would call a political defeat. They were ready to accept
that India has fared much better than Pakistan, and that a sovereign
Islamic nation of Kashmir was not practical. But they pleaded with me
not to be identified with this sort of sentiment.

It was not that there was shame in having this view. The shame would be
manufactured by people who controlled the local media and had the ear of
the Western media, the ones who defamed the idea of calm and normalcy
because peace meant India was winning. 

After that story, every time violence would break out in Kashmir, some
Kashmiri “poets" (of whom there are many) would tell me, with some
complex glee, “Look, Kashmir is happy."

In previous decades, India did try to muzzle the voices of Kashmiri
people. But then, so did Kashmir’s own elite. They humiliated anyone who
suggested aligning with India made sense. 

Like, for instance, Shah Faesal, who in 2009 became the only Kashmiri to
be ranked first in the Indian civil services exam. He faced severe abuse
on social media. 

On his Facebook page, Faesal once said that “…the crop of burger-fed,
Armani-attired pseudo-revolutionaries," referring to long-distance
Kashmiri patriots, had “actually harmed" Kashmir.

In troubled places, it is the poor who usually do not have the means to
flee and make esoteric suggestions about what must be done to ‘win.’ The
people I spoke to in Kashmir wanted the violence to stop, and they
wanted the simplest of things. 

They wanted a normal life. Cricket tournaments, concerts, and, as one of
them said, KFC. When I wrote this, I got sneers from the avocado
constituency. One intellectual said I had claimed that what Kashmiris
wanted was fried chicken and not freedom. 

While this demonstrated reading comprehension problems, a more serious
implication in those sneers was the idea that fried chicken, cricket
matches and cinema halls were frivolous wishes.

In any system, when an old elite becomes the second rung of a society,
they hit back through a moral cause and recruit the poor to fight that
battle. When the poor develop practical ideas, they are lampooned by
their handlers as fools. That was what was going on in Kashmir.
