# Why ‘liberals’ are often bad ambassadors of good ideas

*2024-11-10*

Mostly, they never say anything wrong, but the problem is their
sophistication and self-righteousness, and the banal smugness of their
view that humans should be moral. I do not know Trump’s constituency
well, but Western ‘liberals’ form a monoculture across the world. 

They usually speak the same way and of the same things. They probably
even got their vanity degrees from the same colleges, and have the same
intolerance of any view that deviates from their theology. 

From what I have seen of the type in my country, they are the worst
ambassadors of human decency, and of that beautiful idea—the strong must
protect the weak.

Now that Trump, a man accused of corruption and sexual assault, has
prevailed over the liberal campaign, does it mean more than half the
American electorate is sick? This is what liberals would have us think. 

Or is it that the evangelists of fine human qualities are making those
very qualities look bad? This they do not accept. Maybe they don’t see
it, like the many other things they do not.

Some of them are annoying for no fault of theirs. When you state some
noble things, you inevitably end up irritating people. For instance,
beneficiaries of inequality who write angry essays against inequality.
(If not the cultural elite, who else will say the right things?) 

And, the underemployed young who want to escape the unpleasantness of
adulthood by joining collegiate movements to save the world. (But then,
what is so great about the bogus jobs of capitalism that the young
should not escape them?) 

And women from the top 2% of society who say they are discriminated
against by the top 1%. (They are.) And anyone who rages against those
who do not believe in climate change.

Sermonizing intellectuals can be annoying because what they seem to be
saying is that they are better people than the rest. They can be mean,
petty and classist in their private dealings, but in public they stand
for great causes. They seem to think they have camouflaged their
failings. 

But people, in reality, have no masks, and what they truly are comes
through when they pontificate about those who are not like them, who
don’t agree with them, like when they speak of Trump supporters,
describing them as ignorant, petty, racist, foolish and mostly male, as
though that is a form of evil in itself.

To fully fathom how badly ambassadors of ‘liberalism’ are doing, we need
to measure their efforts against the exquisite job done by the few who
are extremely good at it.

Barack Obama, for instance. He speaks in a manner that is not superior
or contemptuous. Somehow, even when he is sermonizing, it doesn’t appear
to be a sermon. He has a rare talent in a field filled with the
ungifted.

Typically, average people don’t have strong opinions. Rather, they
develop views that are the opposite of the values espoused by people
they despise.

This is a reason why, despite everything we’ve heard lately, the US
elections revealed that Trump has improved his popularity among not just
African-Americans and Hispanics, but also young women voters. 

It simply cannot be just the economy and fear of immigrants, as
intellectuals ask us to believe. People are drawn to anything ‘liberals’
condemn.

There is now wide acceptance among ‘liberals’ that the ‘wokes’ among
them did some damage.

Wokes are, at first glance, hyper-moral people. But I think they are
just people who are so far removed from natural goodness that they have
to make exaggerated guesses about what being good is, which may be the
reason why they do extreme things, like vandalize art to educate us
about capitalism or climate change.

But then, a ‘woke’ is not clearly defined. To many, anyone who imparts
moral lessons outside religion or other forms of magic, meaning any
‘liberal,’ might seem woke.

Wokes, like medieval zealots, can create powerful sects fast. Climate
change, for instance, could not have become a movement based on
scientific reasoning alone. It had to first become a kind of religion.
The early Elon Musk persona itself is a creation of wokes, who were the
first manic devotees of Tesla because it stood for all the right things.

If suave and sanctimonious ‘liberals’ can be poor ambassadors of their
ideals, can it be true that Trump supporters are also poor ambassadors
of the ‘right-wing’? They are. I am certain Trump fans pushed many
undecided voters towards the Democrats. 

But they are less annoying than the self-righteous. A typical Trump
evangelist, such as Elon Musk or Joe Rogan, usually makes fun of wokes,
who are a demonized minority in America. Most people do not identify
with what they are ridiculing.

In India, something interesting appears to be going on. Many people are
thrilled by Donald Trump’s victory. Among those who identify as
right-wing, there seems a sense of satisfaction that a leader of the
right has ascended to power in the world’s most powerful country.

But perhaps they will realize in time that there is no such thing as a
global ‘right-wing.’ Only the left can be global. The right is always
local.
