# Gabriel García Márquez in the time of Netflix

*2024-12-15*

That is how his novel *One Hundred Years of Solitude* begins. The line
merges three periods of time in a single sentence. The narrator talks to
us from the present, conveys that he will be executed in a distant
future (he is not), and sets up the distant past of his father, where
the novel properly begins. I wish I could say that this is why the
sentence is memorable.

Or, because a little boy’s discovery of ice is a beautiful surprise in
such a grave sentence. But I am sorry. I believe the line has become
famous because that’s how far many people have gone with the book. More
or less. No doubt, an unknowable multitude have read it fully in many
languages, but it is also one of those books that more people revere
than have actually read.

Now that Netflix has adapted it as a series, about 100 million people
can get to know the classic, including film critics perhaps. And, even
though they may like most of what they see, they may also wonder what
the fuss over the novel was all about.

Like some classics, *One Hundred Years of Solitude* is actually a very
good novel. Other aspects of its greatness come from the lottery of
fame. Why some good novels are better known than other good novels is
part of the absurd magic of luck.

Since hype is how good things come to us, the collective subconscious of
people tolerates hype and a monopoly over creating it. Novels like this
have let the Western literary establishment, which tells us what to
read, survive. Yet, intellectuals often get it completely wrong.

The novel is framed as “magic realism," which is a nonsensical term that
takes itself too seriously, as though it has more gravitas than fantasy.
Outside fairy tales, all magic in stories is magic realism, including
stories in the Bible and Hindu epics. But that is not my quarrel. My
quarrel is that the magic in the novel is not about fantasy at all.

Strange things do happen in this family saga that spans a century in
Macondo, a fictitious place. There are ghosts, and a person’s blood sets
out to go somewhere. Garcia Marquez was trying to narrate how ancient
people used to tell a story—by converting metaphors into descriptions
and through mistaken views of natural phenomena as supernatural.

When you narrate your grandmom’s stories of what she saw and heard,
without the condescension of interpretation, they may seem like magic.

Arthur Clarke once said, “Any sufficiently advanced technology is
indistinguishable from magic." This is true of ancient history, too. A
historical account by a person in olden times will seem like magic. And
this is what Garcia Marquez achieved as a story-telling technique.

A few years ago, it rained red all over Kerala. A vast region appeared
to be soaked in blood. Science ruined the magic; it said a meteor had
exploded over the region.

If this had happened in another time, people would have said it rained
blood one day, they would’ve told that story in a way that would read
like a page from *One Hundred Years*… That is an unspoken playful strand
in the book. In fact, this is what it is largely about.

There is a moment in the novel when Macondo is struck by an insomnia
plague, which causes inhabitants to forget the names of things.

A few years after its publication in 1975, neurologists formally
recognized a form of dementia called semantic dementia, which is
remarkably similar to Garcia Marquez’s portrayal. Such a disease must
have afflicted a Colombian village long ago and Garcia Marquez must have
heard of its tales.

Compared to our distant future, our distant past could be more
astounding as magic. There is a lot that has vanished and we have no
idea of the sort of things that used to exist. It is not just species
that go extinct, but whole ways of human life. Some of that survives in
our fables.

Surely, Garcia Marquez was not the first to use fables to tell history,
because no one is ever the first in anything. Surely, it is overstated
that he derived the technique from his Colombian heritage, for which
culture did not tell history through fantasies, exaggerations and
metaphors presented as reality? Even the West’s history has a bit of
that.

Fantasy that never happened is somewhat lame. It is dull from an
intellectual point of view. The power of Garcia Marquez, even when we do
not know why we feel it, comes from plausibility.

Surely, he did make up some of what he wrote about and not everything
was an exaggeration of metaphors and natural phenomena; even so, to call
the book by a foolish term for fantasy is to deny people the actual fun
of his work. And the novel is a lot of fun.

Also, generations of writers have ruined themselves trying to imitate
this book thinking it is about inserting absurd magical things in the
middle of a rational plot.

Garcia Marquez himself was not very pleased with the classification of
his genre as magical realism. There is a beautiful line very early in
*One Hundred Years of Solitude*, when he says that the world was so
recent that things didn’t have names and you had to point.

And that was what happened with his own works. It was so new to the West
at the time that the literary establishment had to invent a name. They
would have been more articulate if they had just pointed.
