# There’s probably no such thing as soft power any longer

*2024-03-31*

Over the past five years, the West has worried that India is losing its
values, by which it means that India is not trying to imitate the West.
Even despots are wondering what is up with India. Every country wants
other countries to have Western values. India does not seem to care
about its image in general, but in some regards, it clearly does. So,
now and then, it contemplates using something called ‘soft power.’

A nation’s soft power is usually a bit of weird overrated food, and a
bit of song-and-dance by mediocre artists who are close to the
establishment, all in the hope that the display would make the world
think highly of the nation. The concept of soft power presumes that
people in Belfast would eat some biryani and think India is wonderful.

There is indeed such a thing as soft power. Just that I don’t think
governments have much to do with it. For instance, according to my
taxi-driver journalism in the Maldives, people there seem to have no
affection at all for India, politically, except when they speak of the
Chinese. But many of them love Hindi films. I’ve not even heard of some
of the films they go on about. I do not believe that they have developed
any affection for India because of their love for Bollywood. The Indian
film star is distinct from the Indian government. Hindi film stars may
even be popular in many Asian countries precisely because they are not
from the government.

A few weeks ago, news broke that eight Indian Navy vets were facing the
death penalty in Qatar on espionage charges. When they were released,
there was a rumour that India had requested Shah Rukh Khan to persuade
Qatar to spare their lives. He vehemently denied this, but when I first
heard it, it struck me as probable. Even so, I do not believe that the
popularity of Shah Rukh Khan or Bollywood has enhanced India’s image.
Bollywood cannot sell India.

In Quentin Tarantino’s Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, Bruce Lee is
portrayed as a garrulous clown. Unable to bear him a Caucasian man picks
up Bruce Lee and flings him against a car. In response to this
disrespect, China banned the film. Never has China shown so much love
for an American. For that was what Bruce Lee was; born in America, an
American and a citizen of British Hong Kong. The world loved Bruce Lee
thinking he was Chinese. The world loved him without loving China.

When organic popular culture can’t make a nation endearing, what chance
does government-issue soft power have? Soft power has altered global
perceptions of only two nations. Britain and the US. But even that was a
long time ago; such things not happen today.

Britain not only befriended the regions it plundered, it also somehow
made them read its playwrights, novelists and insufferable philosophers.
It even inspired people to use the term ‘British humour’ and pretend
they know what it is.

All this created the foundation of a powerful idea that the West is a
moral force, and that it is deeply sorry for all the colonizing it did.
In reality, the West is a way of speaking, of articulating the right
things, which has infected the elites in most nations. The Western moral
compass was highly influential in the previous generation, but it was a
bit too noble to survive the democratization of opinion.

For many decades now, Britain has been replaced by the US as the largest
exporter of culture, even though, like Britain, it doesn’t have a
half-decent cuisine. Hollywood, pop culture, black sugary drinks and
buns that can kill humans made America endearing. Probably because the
American government was not directly involved. It is probable that the
Central Intelligence Agency did use culture to fight its battles by
triggering moral agitations in other countries or by translating,
publicizing and canonizing Russian writers who made Russia look
horrible.

The most influential soft power of America and Britain was their
independent news media. It was influential because the morality of
American journalism mostly matched the propaganda of the US government.
So America never needed ‘state media,’ unlike Russia or China.

In a world that is not so naive anymore, even Western soft power does
not work. Yet, many governments have torturous programmes to promote
their middling culture with the hope that the world will hold inaccurate
and flattering views of them. There is a widely perceived success story,
though.

There is much talk about how the South Korean government promoted its
‘soft power’ by amplifying K-pop and soap operas. This compliment is
odd, because K-pop is an imitation of Western pop. And Asians and Latin
Americans probably know that melodramatic Korean TV series are not
unique to Korea. Even if it is true that South Korea manipulated
millions of foreigners into enjoying Western culture masquerading as
Korean, how has it improved perceptions of Korea? If anything, Western
interest in Korea attracted foreign journalists who inevitably did those
‘underbelly’ stories. The globalization of ‘Korean culture’ also
inspired a film called Parasite, which may seem Korean to foreigners but
was meant for a ‘global’ audience. And ‘global’ we know usually does not
include Ethiopia or Sri Lanka. Parasite was designed for the West that
had got curious about Korea and it showed South Korea in very poor
light.

The reason why culture is unremarkable PR for a nation is that all
cultures are fascinating in moderation, and people can only take foreign
culture in moderation. Actually, people can barely tolerate their own
culture.
