# Why is decision-making a lonely process?

*2024-06-02*

He was torn between some options and was undecided between a book,
podcast or documentary. He had to pick one because only amateurs do too
many things at once. A professional has to bet on the best path. Every
decision he makes would cost him months, even years, at the expense of
other pursuits. Then he said something intriguing. He said he couldn’t
decide and there was nobody he could turn to. 

“Nobody can help you," he said. He pointed to his wife who was sitting
right next to him. Even she won’t be able to help, he said. She can only
listen, take in the facts, but the decision has to be his, and he had
been in its throes for weeks. She, as is often the case with wives, was
not surprised. She had heard it before and probably agreed.

This is a pleasant successful man with his own tribe of peers who care
for him, friends and a loving home. Yet, he is alone when he has to make
crucial decisions. That is the nature of decisions.

This is true not only of major decisions. Actually, major decisions have
disproportionate grandeur because they are ‘major.’ Most people have to
make a major decision very few times in their lives, if ever. I, for
instance, have never had to make a ‘major’ decision. I have been
seriously wrong about one or two important things, but I did not get
there by deciding. 

I got there by being certain. I suspect that when people look back at
their lives, some of the decisions they once considered ‘major’ may not
be major at all. Life is filled with a series of small decisions, some
of which can have an outsized impact.

When I set out to write a novel, it was not after a major decision. It
was a mere inevitability. But once I began, the first shock was how many
decisions I had to make. Should the narration be in first person, what
should be the voice, should the lead character do this or that, should
bad things happen to the main character, should it all be happy and
well? All minor decisions, by the standards of decisions, but some of
them turned out to be crucial, not only to a page, or the tone, or the
novel, but to my life.

Eventually, opinions on the manuscript came from a friend, agents and
professional editors, all voices that attempt to influence a decision.
Even considering the quality and intelligence of those opinions and
advice, I feel that the actual decision-making process was almost
entirely lonely. 

You may say that writing is a lonely profession anyway and it is not
surprising that such decisions do not involve the company of others. But
I see that this is true in all professions, including managerial
situations. There appears to be a swarm of advisors, but they are
peripheral to the actual decision taken. In the end, decisions are made
alone.

Gregarious people, or normal people who have a circle of friends and
family, may find this confusing. They have a community and accept that
some people are very important to them. So it appears logical to seek
the advice of those who matter to them when they must make decisions. 

But it never helps. An odd thing about human relations is that odd
combinations are forced upon them. For instance, parents are expected to
be coaches and a person we love is expected to get naked with us. Far
more absurd is that people who are close to us must be able to make
decisions for us.

But people cannot help. This is chiefly because we do not share complete
information with anyone. We never say entirely what we want, what we
need the most and the hierarchy of values we secretly hold. Yet, most
people allow others to make decisions for them. It is an act of love,
even an obligation of love.

In 2011, Australian cricketer Greg Chappell released his memoirs, Fierce
Focus, which included an account of his disastrous stint as India’s
coach. In the book, Chappell presents his view of Sourav Ganguly, the
Indian captain at the time: “His problem was common in India, where the
cultural upbringing of such young stars had it that parents, teachers,
coaches and other mentors, managers and even sponsors, would make their
decisions for them."

It is not as though experts can alter the solitary nature of
decision-making. But a whole industry of experts has risen to influence
decisions. The most harmful thing about a successful person is that he
begins to emit advice. Stripped of all the frills, the advice industry
has one common theme: a person saying, ‘Why can’t you be like me?’
Experts advise on decision-making itself. 

Now and then, a new material arrives in the advice podcast market on how
to be a good manager by making “swift decisions," and I begin to see
some people around me suddenly not spending too much time deciding which
hotel to book or which airline to take. Other weeks, I see people taking
their time, and explaining that being indecisive is smart. I then know
that new material has come in that celebrates indecision.

Most people are not trained to be alone physically, therefore they are
not trained to be alone mentally. I do feel that almost everyone has a
conversation with the self, but very few know how to argue with
themselves. And the only way to make decisions is to argue with oneself
and be acutely aware of all the forces influencing us, especially the
shameful and petty ones.
