# Why the super-rich and we pay the same for house help

*2024-06-23*

Like many wealthy people of Indian origin, and some diplomats, they had
got house-help from India on pay scales that are generous by Indian
standards but illegal in Europe. The prosecution said the Hindujas paid
the staff about $8 a day and that their work-days could be as long as 18
hours. 

The prosecution also alleged that family had “confiscated" their
passports, which is a dramatic way of describing what I gather is a
common practice. The accusations are a few years old. They returned to
the news after a financial settlement was reached with the staff members
but the prosecution pressed criminal charges.

It is likely that the Indian upper class sees all this as excessive
because many of them, too, make poor people work for more than 12 hours
on less than $8 a day. In their defence, they would say that the cost of
living in India is a few times lower than in Europe, so what household
staff members are paid in India is not as bad as it sounds.

A prosecutor said that the family had spent almost $10,000 a year on
their dog, while paying low wages to their human staff. This could be
true even in a typical upper middle-class Indian household. They may
want to point out, though they would never do so in public, that
do-gooders have a bad habit of comparing how much a family spends on
their dog with how much they pay their domestic workers. The comparison
is absurd. A dog brings a lot of joy to the family, and is even seen as
a part of the family, unlike an employee.

The family did not deny the low pay, but said that the long hours’ part
was an exaggeration. They asked, as my neighbours would, that if a
house-help watches a film at home with the children, is that work? Maybe
it depends on the film in question. Also instructive would be whether
the family’s law firm would bill the two hours (or more) its lawyers
would take if they watched the same film to ascertain whether the
viewing was entertainment or work.

The Hindujas also pointed out that their domestic staff’s compensation
was not just the cash they received, but also accommodation and food.
That is exactly what my relatives, too, would say. ‘Accommodation’ in an
Indian household is usually a room that appears to be purposely
impoverished. In my colony, for instance, the default ‘servant quarters’
is a windowless room fit for suitcases.

As a boy growing up in Madras, the most fascinating thing I heard about
the world outside was that in the US, garbage cleaners would come in
cars to clean the streets. That remains, till date, the most impressive
thing I have ever heard about wealth. I eventually realized that the
information, in word and spirit, was a bit of an exaggeration. But the
idea stuck that the best measure of a nation’s wealth is the standard of
living of its poor. Ideally, there should be a similar measure of an
individual’s wealth.

“How rich is that guy?"

“Oh, he pays his driver a lakh."

I really did think in my 20s that was how the world worked.

The rich are willing to talk about how much they spend on cars and
carpets and homes. Wouldn’t it be just as interesting to know how much
the super-rich spend on their servants?

For some reason, you can get to know a lot of obscure things that the
rich spend on, but never what they spend on their staff. That is because
most rich people pay only as much as what the middle class pays their
household staff. 

My colony probably has the per capita income of Switzerland, but it pays
domestic workers half of Europe’s minimum wage. I am not lamenting this.
After all, I too pay my cleaner <span class="webrupee">₹</span>5,000 a
month for getting into acrobatic positions to clean for an hour every
day, and a cook only around the same for working 90 minutes daily on
meals.

The rich keep talking about how they subsidize the poor. They do. But it
is also a fact that the poor subsidize our lifestyles by supplying
labour cheaper than in much of the world. Also, every strata of Indian
society subsidizes the lifestyle of the strata above by working for
exploitatively low wages. And in the end, we have a situation where
Indian billionaires probably pay only as much as I do for domestic work.

No household can be impressive when it comes to the matter of paying its
domestic staff. Historically, all the famously humane writers who moved
our souls through prose had servants who were probably not paid more
than market rates. Merchants and conscience-keepers paid their servants
just about the same. Even if some people pay a bit more, it cannot be an
impressive sum when spoken out aloud, especially if compared with the
incomes of famous humanitarians.

What are the consequence of the Hinduja family case? The wages of
migrants won’t rise; instead, wealthy Indian families living abroad may
stop taking domestic workers from India, fearing trouble, ending a way
of enriching poor Indian families. And wealthy Indian families in the
West would have to hire local help, which must be a bit uncomfortable
because those workers have such swag and that always diminishes the
experience of being a master.
