# Why Kangana Ranaut could be seen as India’s Trump

*2024-10-27*

A few weeks ago, Ranaut got a legal notice for stating that India’s
independence was not real, that it actually got its freedom in 2014 when
Narendra Modi took over as Prime Minister. She has also said that the
Hindi film industry is run by a small cartel of privileged children. 

This is not the sort of thing an actor can say and survive in the
industry. She has probably not survived as such, at least the way she
could have if she did not speak her mind. But she has become a far
bigger public figure by doing just that.

She is India’s Donald Trump, a person who says things others would not.
For this reason, her political future is underestimated the way Trump’s
was. 

Her success in the recent general elections, when she was elected a
Member of Parliament for the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party may turn out
to be just the start.

Every country has its own Trump. Every profession has its own Trump. And
being Trump is about taking a gamble in a world stifled by decorum and
saying things nobody else wants to say, which can be rude in a way many
truths are. 

Trumps were around before the rise of Donald Trump, but they could not
succeed as well as him before the age of social media because a cultural
elite controlled public opinion. 

According to the political theology then, a person had to maintain some
sort of decorum to win votes. Trump showed that was a wrong analysis.

Why should loose talk be politically valuable? Aren’t ordinary people
decent folks? Trump said horrible things. For instance, he has called
people ugly and fat. 

What analysts often don’t get is that Trump became popular not because
of such statements, but in spite of them. There were other things he
said and still says that make people feel he gets them, or is like them.

As his running mate J.D. Vance said in his memoir, there are many
Americans who feel left behind by American progress and the face of that
nation’s advancement is a swarm of suave highly-educated liberals of
many colours, whom Trump roasts. 

It really didn’t matter that Trump was a very rich man, even if not as
rich as he claimed. Between the rich and the posh, the average voter
usually dislikes the posh more.

Ranaut is perhaps more relatable to Indians than Trump is to Americans.
People are more likely to spend money on a Karan Johar film than a
Kangana Ranaut movie, but if both stood for elections, they are more
likely to vote for Ranaut.

Across the world, the rise of the political right has tracked the rise
of individuals who have been blunt and politically incorrect. This is so
in India too.

Typically, when a politician rises in stature and his base becomes
broad, he becomes careful and his articulation becomes part of a
practical decorum. That is why decorum exists. Not because the voting
masses are inherently decent, but because public figures have to appease
all constituencies. 

But some politicians find the freedom to say just about anything they
want and thrive because of that. By speaking their minds, they primarily
offer entertainment. And they often give us insights into the working of
the world in a way that only bluntness can.

A few years ago, I interviewed Ranaut on stage for the Times Literature
Festival. At the time, she was at the peak of her fame as an actor and
enjoyed immense goodwill from all sides, as she was viewed as a person
who came from nowhere and made something of her life in an industry
where opportunities are often preordained. Also, she was yet to fully
reveal her mind.

“I don’t like anything about my job, to be honest," she told me about
acting. “I remind myself the bills that I have to pay."

The only major controversy surrounding her then was her claim that she
had a relationship with Hrithik Roshan, which he denied. But later her
attitude to the film industry changed. She said some industry people
were working against her.

Often, people acquire strong political views not out of deep conviction,
but because those views are the opposite of the values people they
despise hold dear. This seems to be the case of many people in the Hindi
film industry who went ‘right-wing.’ 

But none of them were as blunt as Ranaut, who called out giants in her
own industry. In 2020, at the height of the covid pandemic, when the
actor Sushant Singh Rajput committed suicide, she said it was not a
mental health issue and blamed a Bollywood cartel for pushing him to the
sidelines. 

Those who condemned Ranaut for denying the role of mental health in his
suicide were also the sort of people who don’t accept that mental
health, and not the government, should be held responsible for the
suicides of farmers or Dalit activists.

Before the rise of Ranaut as a politician, the person who came closest
to being India’s Trump was Subramanian Swamy, who once said Indians who
are not Hindu should not be allowed to vote unless they declare that
their ancestors were Hindus.

While the world appears to be filled with loud voices, in reality, it is
a silent place where most people cannot say what they want. Even if the
world appears to be angry now, most people do not have strong opinions. 

They just enjoy the strong opinions of others. Moderates are bores;
extremists are fun. Perhaps Ranaut knows that. Politicians are also
actors. So, in a way, Kangana Ranaut has never really switched careers.
