# Do we really have any field of work that is lucrative?

*2024-03-04*

Every time farmers agitate in Delhi to cut a deal with the government, I
wait for a slew of comments that say the “real issue" is that “farming
is unremunerative." This is said by those who have compassion for
farmers and also those who dismiss their demands. What they mean, in
modern parlance, is that farming has a bad revenue model. If the world’s
most popular consumer behaviour, eating, cannot make food production
“remunerative," it makes me wonder what exactly is lucrative. Is there a
field of human activity in which participants say, “Our profession is
remunerative"? Some individuals do well in almost all professions, but
almost all of entrepreneurship appears to be “unremunerative". At least,
at first glance.

Film producers are struggling. Almost all retailers are struggling. Most
startups are not going to survive. There are venture capitalists who say
they are struggling. All actors, except maybe a half a dozen, are
struggling. Publishing is “unremunerative" for publishers and writers.
Writers, in every form and genre of writing, are struggling. Even most
politicians, who are actually entrepreneurs if we stop being humorous
about what they really are, are struggling. All supremely talented
athletes, barring a few at the very top in their discipline, are
struggling. Take tennis. It appears to be lucrative, but players who are
not in the top 100 struggle to make money. Most of them make a loss, as
they have to bear the costs of their own travel and stay. Like other
entrepreneurs, they have to hustle for side jobs. Last year, ESPN ran a
story on the financial struggle of tennis pros. It featured Kiranpal
Pannu, who was ranked 664th in the world in 2022. That year, “Pannu
earned $6,771 in prize money. But his expenses, predominantly for
travel, \[were\] $34,500."

Unemployment or underemployment has dignified names. One of them is
“investing in the market." Kinder people would say that amateur stock
trading is a form of entrepreneurship. If that is true, most traders too
are struggling—the people who invest directly in making money from
money. Most of them lose money, including those who read ‘technical
charts.’ Speak to anyone who is not salaried, chances are they believe
they are struggling. Even among the salaried, most people do not see
themselves as struggling only because they know their incomes and that
they cannot earn zero or less. But there are very few professions where
the salaried are paid well, and even there, most workers don’t survive
the ever-tapering ladder to the top. Thus most salaried people, too, are
fated to become ‘entrepreneurs’ in fields that are ‘unremunerative.’

Why does the world appear to prosper while entrepreneurs struggle? Very
few thrive and they make capitalism’s averages look good. Is that all
there is to it? Is the promise of capitalism a myth?

There is a bit of doom in the very idea of entrepreneurship. Every
entrepreneur sets out to make money in a line of business that has money
in it. Yet, the reason it is not lucrative is that if profits were
guaranteed, then everyone would flock to it and the finite bounty would
have to be shared among an ever-expanding crowd of competitors until the
guarantee falls apart.

It would appear that capitalism oversells itself through a small number
of successes, whose success millions try to replicate and fail. When you
look around society, don’t you get the feeling that everyone is in the
middle of a spoof? People are imitating what they think the rich did to
get rich, while the actual reason they got rich is never clear.

There is another reason entrepreneurs appear to struggle. Take agitating
farmers. They are middle-class landholding entrepreneurs, and not
farmhands on hire, who are salaried people. Most Indians seem to think
of the typical farmer as an impoverished, oppressed man. There are some
farmers who are this, but the poor and oppressed tillers are usually the
landless, whose immediate oppressors are landholding farmers. The
struggle of the landholding farmer is never to stave off hunger. From
that low level, from that abyss of poverty, no entrepreneurship is
possible. Extreme poverty only makes one think small. The struggle of
the landholding farmer is always growth. In any business, to be still is
to perish, because everything else around it is changing, and getting
expensive.

So an entrepreneur is only a person who has high standards for the
meaning of ‘remunerative.’ Entrepreneurs are actually doing well and,
incredibly, they may not be entirely aware of it.

Something occurred to me when I was thinking about the hold of
superstars on the film industry. I used to think of them as the problem.
They take away most of the budget and profits, leaving little for the
rest. But then I realized that the high fees of superstars increases the
pay of others. A film producer, ‘character actor’ or screenwriter earns
more in commercial movies than in art cinema only because film stars
have inadvertently raised the bar for everyone.

What film stars demonstrate is that many professions are intrinsically
‘unremunerative’ but can become more lucrative if the field manufactures
superstars. We can see this phenomenon in many professions, like all
spectator sports, and even among heart surgeons. People are good at
something, and that something is not very lucrative, and remains so
unless the field has superstars. If the argument is not relevant to all
streams of entrepreneurship, it is because some businesses do not have
any superstars. Farming, for instance, does not have superstars.
