# Why Indian cities may be doomed to remain unliveable

*2024-09-08*

I did try to point out to him on X that right now Bangalore to Bangalore
is two hours. I do not seriously believe he can change my quality of
life, but he is the only politician I know who at least gets the fantasy
right. And I so enjoy reading his tweets that sometimes I look furtively
behind my shoulders to see if I am alone.

Usually, Indian politicians don’t give any hope when they speak of our
urban future. They speak of nonsensical things like “smart cities" and
“twin cities." The fact is India’s politicians and people have worked
together to make Indian cities among the most unliveable and ugly places
on earth.

India is obsessed with the image of its airports. Otherwise, across a
vast landscape, India is an urban catastrophe. I believe this will not
change. There is no hope. I can think of only two phenomena that convey
an accurate representation of modern India.

One is the Olympics and the other is any Indian town. The games expose
how poorly run India is and how unkind we must be to each other to fare
so poorly even against small nations. Our cities convey the same.

Politicians are blamed a bit too much for what is essentially national
character. The political stamina that Indians have for useless issues,
if a fraction of that emotion were dedicated to our decrepit civic
infrastructure, the lack of parks and beauty, our lives would be
instantly richer. But that is not going to happen.

One of the reasons our lives will not improve is that India is unable to
change its attitude towards how to treat Indians. India treats all its
people as though they are poor. In the administrative subconscious,
there is a feeling that this is enough for Indians, they don’t deserve
more, they don’t want more.

Just imagine, wherever you are, what are the meetings scheduled in your
municipal body today? You think they are going to discuss how to make
roads endure, lane discipline, proper medians, working signals and how
to make the city aesthetic so that it can serve the well-being of
residents?

Traffic is not the greatest enemy of urban life. Many great cities in
the world have that problem. Take Bangkok, for example. It has terrible
traffic. Even though its efficient metro system makes life somewhat
bearable, the fact is that it has very bad traffic, and like in India,
its upper middle class prefers car travel despite the jams.

But Thais have such high civic sense and public dignity that Bangkok
cannot match the misery of any Indian metro. India has never seriously
tried to change the public behaviour of Indians.

India’s most influential people do not seem to believe in the idea of a
city. Somehow, they do not appear to crave order or aesthetics or the
comfort of ordinary people.

Also, maybe they intuitively feel that the chaos and ugliness of public
life also make the poor feel that the country has not left them behind.
At any given point of time, visually, India never alienates its poor.
Except at fancy airport terminals.

India’s urban mess may also come from what is widely viewed as a
political virtue—the fact that modern India was not governed long enough
by its cultural elite. There was a lot of democracy very soon.

The elite can be despicable, but they always know how to live well.
Every great city in the world has been a beneficiary of the vision of a
social elite and the ease with which they could enforce codes of social
behaviour.

The fundamentals of modern India too were created by its elite, but they
did not prevail long enough to nurture its cities. Some of India’s early
leaders did not think cities were important.

Gandhi, for instance, wanted to bet big on villages. He was a famous
evangelist of hygiene, but he seemed indifferent to urban planning. He
wanted Indian children to learn handicraft even before their formal
primary education (an idea that lurked in the first five-year plan).

The failure of the modern Indian elite is more interesting. For
centuries, migration was always something that the unfortunate had to
do. People fled nature and persecution. But many developing nations
endured a new kind of migration where the luckiest people migrated to
expand their luck.

For several generations now, the cream of India has migrated abroad or
been in migration mode. It is not as though they hold the secret to
improving urban life, but what the elite’s migration did was lower their
stake in home, and in reforming home.

All successful nations were transformed by their elite. When a society’s
luckiest people do not have high stakes in home, we get modern India.

In this phenomenon also lies our only hope. The Indian upper class never
fully enjoyed migration. Now India has prospered enough to hold some
attraction for the new economic elite, especially those who do not fully
feel they belong in the West.

It costs little to act like feudal lords in India and many find living
here better than having to endure Western order and culture. So, they
may have a growing stake in making Indian cities liveable. They may want
safer roads, and, who knows, even parks, clean air and lane discipline.
