# on life: It is beautiful, and without any magic

*2024-04-28*

An odd quality of the Western intellectual world is that its giants take
simplistic questions very seriously. It is as though social equality
makes it hard for them to be dismissive of majority opinions that are
usually very naive. For instance, almost every Western intellectual
superstar finds the need to denounce God. But how sophisticated can any
argument against God be? Stripped of all ornaments of articulation, such
debates cannot be qualitatively any different from what we used to have
in high school. But there is a related question that Western
intellectuals are obsessed with, which is more complex and for that
reason highly entertaining: Is there magic? Is life mystical? Are some
things, plainly, spooky?

In my view, most people who are called philosophers are not that at all.
Most of them are fans of philosophy, or actors who simulate thinkers.
But I have for several years grown to accept what Daniel Dennett
suspected about himself—that he was a philosopher, even though he was
also known as a ‘cognitive scientist.’ Dennett died last week of what
some people would call old age. But he was only 82.

He said there is no magic, and even as he persuaded us to let go of our
last hope of a mystical world, he somehow made it seem that the
alternative was more entertaining. He said there was no magic in the
mind, especially the human mind which can perceive itself as a mind. He
said the mental can be physically explained; every aspect of the mind
can be explained as we understand more and more about our physical body.
If there is a human soul, it would not faze him. To him, the soul was
probably more of a semantic problem. Whatever it might be, it’s made up
of millions of tiny robots called cells, and smaller robots inside these
cells, robots inside robots inside robots, all of them together creating
the idea of the self, of consciousness, of a life that regards itself as
life. No magic is required. He found this more beautiful than a mystical
world where the Universe has a point to its existence.

We should not have happened. Human life was a freak accident. “Evolution
is a process that depends on amplifying things that almost never
happen," he wrote in one of his many books, From Bacteria to Bach and
Back. A mutation in DNA almost never happens. “Not once in a billion
copyings—but evolution depends on it."

The fact that we happened is astonishing. But having happened, it is not
so astonishing that we think we did not happen by chance. We look at our
rare occurrence and marvel at how many things had to go right, against
steep odds, and wonder if there is someone out there who is responsible,
or “some force" as some people say to sound scientific.

Dennett points out that many complex things in nature are so exquisite
that they appear to have purpose but are a series of logical accidents.
For instance, the intricate and exquisite colonies of termites. These
insects don’t know what they are doing. They build their cathedrals
robotically because they are programmed to do that. There is something
individually ‘mindless’ about the hive-mind. The termite colony is an
architectural phenomenon that has ensured the survival of a species, yet
it has no purposeful design, Dennett says, unlike Antoni Gaudi’s church
in Barcelona.

The human brain is more like a termite colony than a magnificent church.
Our brain is the evolution and synchronization of millions of mindless
robots called neurons, the cells that form our nervous system. Dennett
writes that neurons were once organisms with their own plans, but now
they constitute the brain. Modern neurons “are in effect the
domesticated descendants of very ancient eukaryotes… Composed of
billions of idiosyncratic neurons that evolved to fend for themselves,
the brain’s functional architecture is more like a free market than a
‘politburo’ hierarchy where all tasks are assigned from on high."

The fact that millions of tiny robots can create not just the brain, but
also the idea of the self, made him worry about artificial intelligence
(AI). He could never underestimate what a cluster of lifeless things can
eventually become. Even there, even in the possibility of AI simulating
human life, there is no magic. It can be perfectly explained.

For someone who denounced magic, Dennett also said there was no free
will. At first brush, that sounds like a nod to magic.

One day, you step out of the house for a walk and instead of taking a
left turn, you turn right. Was it inevitable? But why should the
universe make that decision; doesn’t it have grander things to do? We
can see all of universe as deterministic; filled with dominos whose
fates are preordained by an event from the beginning of time. But
doesn’t life break that? Isn’t life chaotic enough for random actions to
determine outcomes?

Dennett was probably not so interested in microcosmic free will—what
made you turn right. He couldn’t have known, anyway. His idea of free
will concerned the larger arcs of life. When we make a choice, he said,
we appear to use information to make a rational decision, or a
rebellious one. But that is not what led to our choice. Our mind is a
cauldron of emotions and biases; it already knows what it is going to
do, but is not aware of it. Many human decisions, he argued, were
pre-ordained, a continuation of long chains of events. Choices are made
for us by forces that are too strong for us to control.

So, maybe yes, there was a powerful reason why you turned right. It was
inevitable that you would turn right. But even in that, there is
probably no magic.
