# Gifting isn’t really the noble act it seems to be

*2024-11-03*

Some cars were piled with gifts and driven by unhappy drivers who would
drop them off one by one. All around me, there were gifts going some
place that would make people happy—nominal gifts, useless gifts, gifts
bought in bulk, lots of sugar, surely, glassware and some silver here
and there. These were obligations inching along jammed streets.

Gifting is not a noble act. Or at least not as noble or simple as it
appears. It is a force exerted by society to make individuals
participate in herd activity. 

A collective, any collective, is always contemptuous and fearful of the
free individual; in response, it promotes rituals to strengthen bonds
and fellowships. All festivals torment the solitary. If nothing, at
least in the form of a traffic jam.

Inside the cars, I noticed most people were heroically patient. As if
they were in the crush of a religious procession. It was as though they
knew this was not commuting, but the concourse of a festival that
everyone was part of. 

Only the paid drivers were miserable, apart from a few people who did
not think bonding with people was worth being stuck in a jam for hours.
Here and there, a driver would leave the car to go urinate in full
public view.

Gifting is an ancient code. And it is as it always was, something that
occurs between peers, between equals. Exactly like envy.

We primarily give gifts to people who do not need them, who have
everything. And what must you give people who have everything? Humans
have probably wasted much time trying to answer this. Not many have
solved it, as we know from personal experience, though we are too polite
to say it and people we love are too polite to tell us.

Gifting is also a caste system. People give expensive gifts to rich
peers and relatives, and cheaper gifts to poorer friends and relatives.
Gifts can broadly tell you what others think of your status.

Some people spend a lot of time trying to find meaningful gifts. They
probably fail, but to them the real gift is the time they have spent. Of
what use is such wasted time? I would not want people I love, and who
love me, to waste time on my behalf trying to get me what I don’t need
or what I can buy easily. 

My way of loving people is to give their time back to them. But, I know,
most people do appreciate the time and effort others put into expressing
their love, or their obligation, as is usually the case.

I would not mind at all if you gave me very expensive things that I
would not normally buy. But then, they would not be gifts. Gifts, by
practical definition, are something you don’t need or need someone else
to buy for you. Anything too expensive is actually a form of payment; a
fact that is so plain, even the income tax department knows it.

Gifting to people who cannot afford the gift, in reality, is not
gifting. It is alms. What is modern about this is that it is called
‘gifting.’ And what we ‘gift’ to the poor is often an instruction to
them on how we expect them to live. 

We fill the lives of our friends with pretty things, and useless things
that will be recycled, but when we have to gift the poor, we buy them
stuff that we think they ‘need’— like food. We don’t ‘gift’ them money
because we presume they will ‘waste’ it. 

People somehow cannot bear the idea of urchins using their money to go
watch a movie. Somehow, that is wasteful in a way feeding them cheap
burfi is not.

J.D. Vance, Donald Trump’s running mate, in his book Hillbilly Elegy
talks about how his experience of poverty made him see through how
ridiculous it is when the rich attempt to give gifts to the poor. 

Once, when Salvation Army gave him a list of gifts to buy for the poor,
he found faults with “nearly every suggestion." He found ‘learning aids’
condescending, since they made it seem as though the only thing the poor
needed was to learn and reform. 

About that most common gift—‘pyjamas,’ he says the poor don’t wear
pyjamas; they go off to sleep in their jeans or whatever it was they
were wearing when they felt sleepy.

As modern people, there is something amateurish about us; we are amateur
humans, compared to more feral people. Charity, like compassion, is
modern and we are still finding our way through this new behaviour. 

When gifting is not confused with charity, when we fully see gifting as
a social conduct between equals, we are more sure of ourselves, because
it is an ancient act. Every ancient thing we do is a herd activity.

The academic anthropologist Marcel Mauss argued in his famous essay,
‘The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies,’ that
gifting was an ancient practice and not an individual’s action. It was
an obligation imposed by the whole clan on individuals.

Mauss has a very affectionate view of gifting partly because in its
original state, it had a quality that humanities scholars love—it was
not an economic activity. 

In olden times, gifts were not “… solely property and wealth, movable
and immovable goods, and things economically useful. In particular, such
exchanges are acts of politeness: banquets, rituals…"

Now gifting has become an economic activity. But a fundamental quality
of gifting still derives from its ancient origin. It is an obligation
imposed by the clan.
