# How unhealthy behaviour could deliver success

*2024-09-15*

Even in the arts, and other solitary professions, the origin of success
is in people who like you and for that reason do not find you very
threatening. No matter what your calling is, to find success, you have
to be part of a tribe.

For that, you have to meet them often, and for that, you have to go out
and eat sugar and deep-fried food and drink ethanol in its various
forms, and eat more late in the night, and sleep late, and wake up late.

A prerequisite of modern success is indulging in unhealthy behaviour.
This is because a majority of people like unhealthy behaviour, even
though they fear death and wish to be healthy. Their joy of life comes
from the very things that can kill them. And the friends they like the
most are those who live like them.

This is why there is some truth in a saying that has never died on
social media, which is attributed to various celebrities: “When you
upgrade your life, you lose 90% of your friends."

It was not always so. There was a time, at least in the West, when
people met useful people while walking through the woods.

Every time I read science history, I wait for that part where this young
scientist says something to a Nobel laureate, who is impressed, and
invites the young scientist for a walk through the woods. If that was
still the world, a very different sort of people would have risen to the
peaks of their professions.

Even today, some unhealthy behaviour is not required for success. For
instance, most ‘networking events’ are useless because nothing that is
called networking is ever networking. People of consequence usually do
not attend such events. So, most networking events are actually meetings
where people who can’t be very useful to one another socialize.

But there is such a thing as networking, and it never appears to be
that. Powerful people meet their equals on someone’s sofa, talking about
things that do not appear to be work, and seekers who can infiltrate
such a network without looking desperate may get somewhere.

But even these meetings usually happen late at night, over drinks and
sugar by its many names.

In many professions, the sudden death of someone is accompanied by
laments of excessive work pressure. But a bit of this seeming ‘work,’ or
even a big part of it, is drinking late into the night with clients or
informants. Or even colleagues and friends, which is as professionally
rewarding as socializing with people who are useful in more obvious
ways.

Former Starbucks CEO Laxman Narasimhan, famously claimed that he didn’t
work after six in the evening, or even took work calls except in
extraordinary circumstances. A few weeks ago, when he was removed from
his post, some people attributed his departure to his outrageously
healthy view of life. I think that is a bit of an exaggeration.

Still, a person who is very clear that his family and health is his
priority, and who can act to achieve it by declaring that he will not
work after 6pm, is a sort of person who would make his bosses nervous.
In India, especially, people hang around the office late even if they do
no work to impress their bosses.

In European cities, a funny thing happens to people who go for a run
very early in the morning. Often, at say 6am, I have run past a crowd
spilling out of a pub, people who are still drinking. They avert their
eyes. Maybe they are sheepish. Yet, they form a large number of people
in the world.

When I see them, I am reminded this is where popular culture is created,
this is where future success is created, and where deep friendships are
formed. And they have a monopoly over what constitutes socializing.

As the healthy sleep, in other rooms of the world, powerful bonds are
forged over conversations and liquor.

One of the strange things about English is that sex is referred to as
‘sleeping’ with someone, while this intense aerobic activity is the
exact opposite of sleep. It is an undeserving tribute to the night and
an omen that the modern world is designed in such a way that all fun is
expected to happen only in unhealthy ways.

As a boy, I was a direct witness to the ways of a previous generation of
alcoholic journalists and artists, and I know why the alcoholic male has
a lot of friends—he reassures others that he is as doomed as the rest of
them. The same principle is what makes your relatives go crazy the
moment you choose a very healthy diet.

There is a movement in the United States to popularize a trend of
morning parties where larks dance under the influence of fresh juice. I
do not expect it to succeed. It is doomed because it is no match for
human nature.

I think there is an ideal way to be. This involves absolute health, and
for that, one has to sacrifice a bit of success—not all of it, but some
of it. Even for this limited success, one has to go out and meet the
tribe, and do all the unhealthy things it entails.

Some people do choose never to leave their islands, and for that they
make peace with professional failure. But this may not be so healthy. If
you don’t find even modest success, you will end up overrating success,
which is a nice way of saying you would become bitter.
