# Why the arrest of Kejriwal may have big consequences

*2024-03-24*

There might be some people who think like this: India’s Enforcement
Directorate (ED) is an independent investigative body that has gone
after some key people in the Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) purely to rid the
nation of corruption. But I personally do not know a single person who
thinks this.

There is a perception that Arvind Kejriwal was arrested on Thursday
night for political reasons. Even so, people believe that the ED must
have some sort of dirt on AAP to prove its claim that Kejriwal took
kickbacks to devise a liquor policy that favoured some “wholesalers from
the south." Otherwise, how could a sitting chief minister of Delhi be
arrested from his home, and his former deputy, Manish Sisodia, spend so
many months in jail?

As publicly known so far, what the ED has as evidence against them in
the Delhi liquor policy case are statements of co-accused who turned
approvers. If there is further evidence, we do not yet know.

While denying bail to Sisodia, who has been in prison since February
2023, the Supreme Court observed that just because a policy enriches
some people, and it is natural for government policy to benefit some
people, it does not automatically prove that politicians adopted it for
kickbacks. The ED is yet to show a money trail establishing that AAP
leaders received bribes.

The liquor policy case has demonstrated the ease with which the ED can
put popular politicians in jail under the Prevention of Money Laundering
Act (PMLA) and the reluctance of courts to grant bail. What is the
consequence of this extraordinary phase in Indian politics? What is the
consequence of Kejriwal finding himself in a lock-up on corruption
charges?

I guess that the Bharatiya Janata Party’s analysis is that it stands to
gain. The typical BJP supporter may not be enraged by Kejriwal’s arrest,
but I am certain there are millions of voters who are.

People in general do not like bullying. Especially in South India. This
is probably because when a person seems to be getting bullied, onlookers
are reminded of their own bullies. Also, even though the BJP is clearly
wary of Kejriwal’s charms, it appears to underestimate an important
aspect of his popularity. Many people who do not vote for him still like
and admire him. Many people are found to admire Kejriwal, whose party
has swept Delhi assembly elections more than once, for understanding
what many Indians want—good education for their children and free
quality healthcare. So the arrest of Kejriwal could have increased his
heft as politician.

Another consequence of his arrest is not so obvious —the
de-intellectualization of the sacredness of institutions.

It is now becoming clear to the average Indian why institutions are
important, and this realization is dawning without the annoying mascots
of institutions—sanctimonious scholars and activists. It is not an easy
realization because from a voter’s point of view, the government’s right
of way is strong and obvious. That institutions, like courts,
investigative agencies and the Election Commission, should be equal
counterweights to an elected government is usually a pious argument made
by Indian intellectuals that seems more like an expression of their own
fight for relevance. The government, however, is an expression of the
people; how can it fulfil their broad wishes if institutions come in the
way? Aren’t institutions, after all, the fiefdom of eggheads whom people
rarely elect?

In fact, aren’t modern governments in all democratic countries an
expression of mass distaste for the intellectual class and bureaucracy?
And if a government appears to be unethical, isn’t this just another
reflection of human nature? How then can scholars and clerks hinder the
actions of a government elected by the people? And on the question of
ethics and morality, what right do some bureaucrats have to decide what
they are?

But then, Kejriwal’s arrest has amplified the importance of institutions
as emphasized in civics lessons from school. In this way, the arrest of
the AAP leader may have inadvertently done more to underline the
importance of independent institutions, especially the courts, than any
other event in recent memory.

If it comes to be that a court hears Kejriwal’s plea for justice, and he
comes to court himself to exploit the occasion as a politician, some
ludicrous aspects of the money laundering act could be laid bare for the
public. The Supreme Court may put the extraordinary powers that can be
exercised under the PMLA to a test of consistency with basic principles.
If the Court could deem electoral bonds illegal, as it recently did,
perhaps a draconian law could get a similar look-in as well.

If that happens, it would demonstrate that unelected institutions could
act in a more democratic way than a government. Ordinary people might
then be able see that an institution is an election of ideas. There is
campaigning and persuasion, even biases and superstars. Eventually, the
fittest idea wins, and the fittest idea is usually the most ethical idea
that has considerable public support.

There is an aspect of a nation’s moral character that cannot be measured
by votes, and need not be measured at all. It just wins. Because it
protects everyone from bullies.
