# What next after the temple ceremony in Ayodhya

*2024-01-22*

All around me, there has been a spectacle of euphoria at most. In my
colony, a security guard was deployed to distribute scented candles with
the brand-name “Ram". I do not know why scented candles exist as an
object in the first place, but I accepted it.

Of course, some people are exhilarated, and ‘some people’ in India could
be millions. My cab driver arrived wearing a saffron cap with images of
Lord Ram on it, playing a holy song. I asked him to turn the music off,
as I do every time I get into a car. Only after I said it, did I think
there could be trouble. He gave me a look, but switched it off. Then he
rechecked my name on the app and looked at me again in the rear-view
mirror. But we quickly became friends, and I even conducted taxi-driver
journalism on him. He did not change my view that at a mass level, there
is very little real euphoria. I have not been able to convince anyone
about this view, but even Hindus who dispute me are not euphoric
themselves. They say others must certainly be filled with passion for
the event, but they personally do not know anyone who is moved by
Ayodhya today the way Hindus were in the 1990s.

As I write this piece, I feel I am in a time that is similar to times
when religions were born, or at least when legendary temples and mosques
were dreamt into life. This was perhaps how the Konark Temple was
consecrated—an emperor willed it, and on the day of the consecration,
the whole kingdom had to know, even though only VIPs were invited to the
holy site, and surely all schools were shut. After Mir Baqi built the
Babri Masjid in Ayodhya, the whole town must have came to a standstill
for its inauguration. And I wonder if the political act of creating a
temple or mosque failed to stir mass religious fervour in olden days
too.

A few days ago, a friend told me that it is in the nature of belief that
spectacular places of worship, like the Blue Mosque in Istanbul, or
Notre Dame in Paris, do not have the same religious gravitas as
pilgrimage sites, which are usually small, austere and serious places of
worship. This is true, but I feel there is a more immediate reason why
there is so little mass religious zeal around the temple. The coolness
is a sign that devout Hindus know they have finally won India back in a
crucial way; a cultural war that raged for centuries is over. Even
though a sense of Hindu victimhood survives as a convenient emotion, I
feel that in sober moments few doubt that Hindus are more equal in
India. If the crowning glory of the victory, in Ayodhya, has been met
with equanimity, it is because victors wear victory easy.

Now that the Hindu side won, what is the meaning of it all? What’s next
for India?

In one possible scenario, I hope we can be a little like the UAE, where
clarity over a religious identity, Islamic in this Gulf country’s case,
underpins a vague secular modernity on the surface that is required to
attract Western investments. In that way, the ‘secularism’ of, say,
Dubai is functionally effective. It exists, and within its narrow
boundaries, it is even consistent.

There is an argument that India cannot have Dubai’s diluted ‘secularism’
because our religious diversity differs significantly in its make-up
from the UAE’s. Unlike the floating minority groups of the Emirates,
Muslims are a sizeable proportion of India’s population, which is
reckoned to be above 1.4 billion people now. This tends to complicate
the country’s Hindu-Muslim dynamics of popular representation in the
context of polarized politics.

As things stand, Muslims appear to have replaced Dalits as India’s
actual underclass. Dalits, even in the eras they fared worst, could
escape their caste by leaving their village lives to seek cultural
anonymity in Indian cities. Muslims in India do not appear to have the
same escape path from their social identity, since name recognition
plays a role in how they are identified.

For centuries, Hinduism was the indisputable background hum of the
country, and caste was the individual’s effective social identity.
Before the Muslim invasions and Mughal phase of history, as records
indicate, Hinduism was so fundamental to India that elite Hindus freely
experimented with Christianity, Buddhism, Jainism and scores of faiths
and cults that have vanished, without the fear of losing their
Hinduness. What never changed for most, however, was their caste. Today,
strife related to caste is likely to continue despite a spectacular
resurgence of Hindu belief.

This dominance will also not alter the fact that cultural free speech
has been vanishing in mainstream India. Society, by and large, is very
different from what it was ten years ago. Then Indians enjoyed some
kinds of free speech not because of any dedication to ideals, but
because of Indian inefficiencies. In the melee of Indian life, some
freedoms percolated down to people. Now cultural governance appears to
be very organized.

I wish road design and lane discipline were included in the cultural
shift that is underway. But all the things that save lives and improve
the quality of modern life in India do not fall under the ambit of
religion or politics.
