# The quiet influencers: How the poor have shaped India

*2024-06-16*

Most of India is hot most of the year, yet most offices and modes of
public transport are not air-conditioned. India is not protecting the
environment; just that it perceives air-conditioning a luxury, and its
unspoken policy is that Indians need not be treated with luxuries. That
is how India has trained the poor to think, and this is how the poor
have shaped India to treat them.

The first order Modi signed after taking over will give away cash—about
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>20,000 crore to about 100 million
farmers. This was probably a way to convey to India’s poor that contrary
to what they may have thought, they were his priority.

Indian elections are often the revenge of the poor.

In past years, whenever the educated middle-class grew cynical of
democracy, India’s poor have shown their faith in it by turning up to
vote. They have forced governments at all levels to be compassionate
alms-givers. And this year, the poor intervened again and diminished the
might of the ruling party. But this is only the obvious way in which the
poor have shaped India.

India’s public character comes from its poor. India is the way it is
chiefly because of its poor. Almost every concrete and abstract thing in
India is influenced by the poor. India’s elite in every field are deeply
influenced, affected and shaped by the poor.

India’s poverty gives Indians a clear moral direction. Every affluent
Indian may or may not have a moral compass, but certainly has one for
India, and it directs the country to end poverty. How to go about it is
at the heart of our economic, social and political debates. Many
powerful emotional issues like religion are secondary to the wound of
poverty. 

People who do not consider this the priority cannot hope for a career in
public life. When India wants to invest in technology, it must first
make it dreary by invoking the tech’s uses for the poor. This is what
India did at the advent of space exploration, the internet and mobile
phone—it was all meant for the poor, especially poor farmers, as though
India’s poor have no other profession. 

Satellites would save farmers from nature; the internet would tell
farmers crop prices and mobile phones would save their children in
emergencies. Eventually, digital connectivity spread across the country
because of entertainment like music, films and porn, but the notion that
even the poor want fun does not seem to strike us. We are shaped by the
gravitas of poverty. Even when the poor try to tell us that not
everything about them is grave all the time, we are unable to fully
understand that dimension of life.

The Indian middle-class may not always realize it, but its sense of
well-being emerges from the poor, from being privileged in a sea of
poverty. Many of them may realize it when they go West and do not feel
special anymore. When at home, Indians are so habituated to their
privilege that they seem to start believing in the foolish notion that
the poor are poor because they are lazy or not smart. 

Actually, a typical middle-class person is a great beneficiary of
poverty. India may appear to be a very competitive place because of the
sheer number of people who turn up for a seat, but the fact is that most
Indians do not have a chance at a fair shot. Their role is to make up
the vast numbers and make the winners look distinguished.

But look at what happened to the profile of the Indian cricket team when
more Indians found the nutrition, opportunity and equipment to train for
this sport. The straight-bat middle-class city boys who could speak well
at press conferences have vanished. In the same way, the make-up of
prestigious colleges has changed. But there are reminders of many things
that have not changed. The nation is still rigged in favour of people
from affluent homes.

Also, it is very cheap to be middle-class in India because the poor
subsidize us all. The poor serve us for almost nothing. They also force
the government keep the prices of many basic necessities low.

The price we pay for it is that India treats everyone as though they are
poor. India, in plain sight, looks poorer than it really is. If you do
not count airports. Some of our airports are so swanky, I am tempted to
follow foreign passengers who are visiting India for the first time—just
to see the shock on their face when they hit the actual town they came
to visit. India assumes that airports are for the rich and that they
deserve spaces that are beautiful, while the rest of the nation need not
pretend to be aesthetic.

There is not much street joy in our cities because the good life cannot
just spill onto the streets. To eat a large meal in public is somehow
vulgar. Any sign of affluence in plain sight is vulgar. That is why it
is amusing when upper-middle-class people condemn billionaire weddings.
Just about any middle-class wedding, or even a typical five-star buffet
in India, is an insult of the poor.

India’s civic ugliness does have an unsung social benefit: it does not
alienate the poor. Unlike in Europe where the poor live in great
contrast to the spectacular urban beauty all around, India’s poor belong
more easily in our public spaces. As a result, the affluent almost never
interact with public spaces. They live in little islands of private
spaces, like zoo animals that own their own zoos.
