# Fintech question: Why is the credit card still around?

*2024-02-04*

My latest credit card bill is less than
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>2,000. Even at the height of covid, my
spend was never this low. I have not become poor. I have been reducing
my credit card purchases ever since I discovered Paytm, which was so
smooth and efficient that it felt as though finance had liberated itself
from government clerks. (How wrong I was, but that later.)

Like most people, I started with small purchases and with the launch of
the Unified Payments Interface (UPI), I started using the app for big
online transactions. In recent times, I have used my credit card only
when I was left with no practical choice, like when I was booking a
hotel outside India, for which I would be fleeced 3.5% of the
transaction amount and an unfair currency exchange rate. If it were not
for global financial bureaucracy, I have no need for a credit card at
all. I never needed the ‘credit’ part of the card. Most people don’t.
And I wonder everyday why e-wallets and the UPI have not already killed
credit cards. But the fact is that credit card customers and card usage
continue to rise in India, and it is Paytm’s payments bank that has been
dealt a grave blow by the gatekeepers of Indian finance.

In any case, as far as I am concerned, credit cards are dead. There is a
newspaper in my head that is entirely dedicated to the events in my
life. On its front page is the headline: ‘Credit Cards: End of an Era.’

I first saw a credit card when I was 19, when Citibank somehow gave it
to a close relative who should have been the last person to hold such a
card. On the day of the card’s activation, he took his wife and daughter
to the market and bought utensils and innerwear. They marvelled at
procuring goods without the feeling of having spent any money. The man
defaulted on the very first bill and has since evaded all kinds of
people whom the bank sent to collect the money. But, in that house, even
today, “Citibank" is a discreet code for underwear.

I would be 28 when I would get my own card, but I would almost never use
it because I was then suspicious of everything I did not need but was
given to me. But eventually I accepted its convenience. Sometimes when I
would forget to pay the bill, I would be charged a huge interest, which
was more than what villainous moneylenders in art cinema charged.
Money-lenders across the world lived in social guilt and the suspicion
that all bad things that happened to them were because of curses of the
indebted; but not credit card executives. The credit card, of course,
was once a marvel of technology. But not anymore. Without the marvel, it
is just a temptation offered by a sly money-lender.

I particularly dislike credit cards because two layers of banking
middlemen take protection money on every international transaction just
for having a monopoly over the gateways. They make me see the point of
cryptos; and also why governments and banks would have never let them
survive. I have stopped using my credit card domestically in vengeance
against the companies that made 3.5% of every foreign transaction.
Sometimes, it was 7%—like when a hotel used my card to block a deposit,
and later when it released the money back to me, the banking system
charged me 3.5% on each transaction along with a comical interpretation
of exchange rates. So I deny them revenue on my home turf where I
suddenly have options. I don’t think my transactions at home are
entirely free, because the merchant at the point of sale does pay a fee
and it is all passed on to me. Yes, for using the card my bank does give
me “reward points," which I can encash for many useless goods and some
useful coupons, but the “rewards" only remind me that I am paying extra
for it all in some form when I use the card. I agree that
“zero-interest" equated monthly instalments (EMIs) are helpful for those
who wish to buy an expensive good they may or may not need, and that a
zero-interest EMI is truly zero. Even so, such schemes are funded by
merchants to attract customers, which means one way or another I pay a
price for the “zero-interest-EMI," even though I have no need for it.

In my toxic relationship with the credit card, a decisive moment came in
December last year. I was in a restaurant and did not have my phone, so
I had to use my card. Maybe someone saw the number on it and passed it
on. That evening a person used my card to make online purchases worth
more than £5,000. My bank eventually resolved the issue and I got all my
money back, but I was done with the credit card.

As I feel armed with good modern options, I feel sorry for Paytm, which
was how many of us discovered ‘fintech.’ Paytm had seeded a bank that
the Reserve Bank of India has crippled for “non-compliance." It will
affect millions of users; not in a serious financial way, but in a
behavioural way because they are habituated to Paytm’s interface. One
would expect RBI to give clear reasons for the harsh blow. But the
problem is not clearly defined. All we have are problems cited by
unnamed sources. The venerated central bank has had problems with Paytm
for some time over know-your-customer processes, fake compliance and for
not setting up enough safeguards against sharing data with foreign
companies.

There is a general feeling that RBI has a point, but I cannot help but
feel that the country’s banking bureaucracy dislikes all that can
replace conventional banking. It reminds me of how much of the telephony
clergy despised the internet and then mobile phones when they first
appeared.
