# Palestinian puzzle: Could low-stakes compassion be dangerous?

*2024-04-22*

Hamas has the most sophisticated defence system. It uses Palestinian
civilians as a shield. David Brooks, in his column in the New York
Times, wrote, “Hamas’s goal is to maximize the number of Palestinians
who die… Hamas’s survival depends on support in the court of
international opinion." This was always the strategy of Hamas. If
terrorists have powerful uses for our compassion, then the question
arises whether it is dangerous to have the sort of compassion they want.

But then, we can argue that we are not always in control of our
compassion. It may be used for tactical purposes, but human compassion
itself is a natural resource of the world, like air and the oceans. And,
it cannot be just turned on or off just because the wrong sort of people
mine it. In that case, does a natural resource contain within it great
dangers for the very people it cares for?

Fast-forming global compassion for far-away issues is new to human
nature. The history of how the world has felt sorry for Palestine is
brief. The point I began to witness this history was in the mid-80s, as
an average Indian boy. Israel appeared to be a valiant small nation
surrounded by dangerous foes. And a man called Yasser Arafat was somehow
one of the most recognizable men in the world. But it was hard to figure
out why they were fighting. In the 80s, if you did not understand
something, you had to read a whole book. Actually, even today that is
the only way, but there are illusory options like “10 things you should
know about Palestine" and so on. Outside the Levant, very few knew much
about the Palestine conflict.

Then, with the advent of the internet, everybody skipped a step. It was
not information that flowed, but a peculiar mix of information and the
emotion of its source. Since then, the region has been erupting every
now and then, usually because an Israeli attack has killed civilians.
And the world has erupted in rage against Israel. It is every
generation’s introduction to proxy outrage.

Until a year ago, nobody fully accepted the view that Hamas hid behind
and beneath civilians. It was dismissed as Israeli propaganda. In 2014,
when Israeli bombardment in Gaza killed several children, there was
massive global anger against Israel. Palestinians were always good with
their propaganda, as it was a part of their defence mechanism. The
internet was filled with images of Israelis on comfortable sofas,
watching Gaza being bombed from vantage points. People shared images
with comments like “disgusting" on social media, probably sitting on
comfortable sofas themselves.

People who live far away from a conflict zone develop simple views of
‘victims’ and ‘villains’. In 2014, if you tried to point this out, or
the fact that Hamas hid among the civilians not just in defence but also
to get civilians killed, you were quickly disgraced as heartless.

Compassion for far-away people is a feature of modernity. Imagine a time
in ancient India, in Magadha perhaps. A group of young people are having
boiled asparagus and mild tea, when a messenger walks in to say that in
Kosala there has been a massacre of civilians in a market. Magadhans are
outraged. “Sick," someone says. And they engrave slogans on a bronze
plate and march with them in protest against the massacre. I don’t think
this ever happened. I cannot substantiate it, but I suspect that in
antiquity, there was no long-distance compassion for people who did not
belong to one’s race, region or caste. Even today, the most visible
outrage is in the West, which is not only a physical place, but also a
way of being. I don’t think most Indians, for example, are outraged by
much outside what directly concerns them.

Just because a human feeling did not come from antiquity, it does not
mean it is not human nature. Modernity might be the name of a time, but
it is also the character of a time. And the character of our age is that
the elite among us feel strongly for people far away, especially when
the cost of feeling sorry is low. Hamas always knew that. The world
would have been a wonderful place if people felt this level of
compassion for those much closer to them. But the way of the world is
that people feel more compassion for Palestinians than for their
spouses.

I know a person who has very strong views about Islam in India, but
about five years ago when he visited Palestine, he was enraged by
Israel, by “what they are doing to the poor Palestinians." Time and
again we see that there is no such thing as a global right-wing. People
are ‘logical’ about the oppression of minorities at home, but
compassionate about what is going on far away.

So what? What are people expected to do when they read that scores of
children have died in a school or a hospital because Israel was hunting
some terrorists underneath? How can we not feel the pain of those
people? So this is ultimately another way of asking how must we be? How
should we be?

The answer is in the people who have not easily shown their feelings for
Palestinians. Not counting Jews, Muslims and others who have stakes in
the conflict, I feel there are broadly three kinds of people who are not
easily outraged by Israel. One, people who dislike or fear Islam. Two,
people who instinctively side with the strong. The third group should
interest us. They are people who are helplessly objective, who
demonstrate that this is a personality type. Wary of global emotions,
they know every conflict has two sides, and only one side makes for
great photojournalism. They know their emotions are valuable and never
give it away cheap. I think this is a good way to be.
