# How do noble proposals like an inheritance tax arise?

*2024-05-05*

Sam Pitroda was one of the most famous men in India in the 1980s. As the
seer of Indian telecom, he was responsible for millions of long-distance
calls by Indians getting through. He was perhaps too suave to win an
election, yet he was among the most powerful men in India because Rajiv
Gandhi took his advice very seriously. A few days ago, Pitroda said that
India should adopt an inheritance tax and that the wealth of the rich
should be redistributed. It was a very 1980s moment from a star of the
1980s. The BJP portrayed his statement as part of the Congress
manifesto, which is not true.

What Pitroda said should have been one of the most unimportant
statements about the future of India, but because of who he once was and
because general elections are going on, it received disproportionate
interest. Even so, India’s poor should have loved what he said. After
all, what he said was that when the rich die, some of their money should
be taken away from their kin and given to the poor. Yet, the BJP
amplified his message as though this was a nation filled with
billionaires; the Congress said he was speaking on his own and distanced
itself from his views. Many young men and women who appeared to be from
modest backgrounds went to a Congress office to protest against the idea
of the inheritance tax and “wealth redistribution."

What is useful about the controversy is the rare peek it offers us into
how humane ideas arise. There is something about the way Pitroda said
it, and the fact that he even said it, that tells us how such ideas may
have come about in other countries. (India, too, had an estate tax, but
it was abolished by the Rajiv Gandhi government in 1985.)

How does society bring in reforms when powerful people stand to lose
from change?

You can say that change happens because good people bring about good
things. You can say that Pitroda wants an inheritance tax because he is
better than most of us and wants to change the destinies of the poor.
This could be true, but what if something else is going on?

If reform is not brought about by the uncontainable good of good people,
then what causes it? Why do good things happen?

The reformation of a society can be explained without giving too much
credit to reformers and the naïveté of imagining that some human beings
are more noble than others, and that the good guys somehow win some
battles. Society changes for the better when the second rung of social
power takes on the most powerful. This is usually done in the name of
the poor, for a moral cause.

The other reason society changes is that children do not want to be
their parents. Sometimes this includes children of rich parents with
exaggerated contempt for some qualities of their parents that leads them
to do what their parents would never do, especially virtuous things. But
mostly, change occurs because of the first reason: Because the second
rung, the aristocracy, gets tired of the royalty of their time. What
could hurt royalty more than society taking away half of what these
royals planned to bequeath to their genetic offspring?

Pitroda was probably never a billionaire, but he was part of the elite
of a time when class and sophistication alone could take you high up
social peaks. In a changing world, a very different sort of people now
occupy those peaks. Even India’s new capitalists look different from his
time.

What would you do if you were him and wanted to take on the new elite?
You would start by doing something that would upset them. Maybe you
would suggest that their children should not get to inherit their
fortunes freely. They should pay a price for their luck.

Often, policy activism is a war of millionaires against billionaires.
This was the origin of that celebrated document, the Magna Carta, from
where modern democracy probably emerged. To fix the king, the barons of
England had to say modern things. That the king would not punish a
person until guilt is proven, or that the state will not usurp the land
of its people, and that in peacetime England would protect merchants as
they plied their trade. Even the French Revolution was not as simple as
the poor revolting against the elite—it was a risky uprising of
aristocrats against their bosses in the name of social reform. India’s
freedom movement itself was, among other things, a kind of class
struggle between the top two classes of the time, the British and the
local elite.

There is a sort of inequality that looks bad in statistics. For
instance, when you look at the top 1% and how much of a nation’s wealth
they own. But there is another sort of inequality that never shows up in
our statistics, which is far less natural but more poisonous. It does
not feature billionaires. It is the imbalance that favours the upper
middle class on every turf where they compete with those who are poorer
than them.

Billionaires and their children are not in competition with the rest of
society. Except for the roads perhaps, there is no resource, no aspect
of life that they are forced to share with other classes. But if you
consider millionaires or the country’s vast upper middle-class, they do
compete with the rest of society in entrance exams, business startups,
cinema, literature and the arts. And they have an unfair head-start
created not only by ancestral wealth, but more effectively by social
contacts. Seen this way, billionaires have a far smaller role in
inequality than the upper middle-class.
