# The spectacle of SpaceX’s rocket catch is how science has failed

*2024-10-20*

A few days ago, the world appeared to have the same look when Elon
Musk’s company SpaceX managed to grab a descending booster with giant
pliers. I don’t know why the world reacted the way it did to the event.
We have seen more marvellous things.

I just don’t get the greatness of the booster catch. The hype was
similar to the time when Musk launched his red car into space and his
fans were blown, as though they had not heard of an object called a
satellite that could be put to better uses than an orbiting Tesla. 

I do not say that capturing a rocket booster is no scientific
achievement. I just say that in 2024, it is no marvel. And that it is
perceived as a marvel points to a problem.

Rocket science has always had more allure than its technological
substance deserved. Even in its glory days, there were sciences that
required greater human brilliance than shooting off metal to space. The
phrase that actually captures the meaning of “it’s no rocket science" is
probably, “it’s no malaria cure." 

But it just does not sound as cool. Even the word ‘ballistic’ carries
disproportionate scientific sophistication, though it merely describes
gravity. (A ‘ballistic missile’ has an unguided descent while a ‘cruise
missile,’ which sounds more recreational, is guided till the very end.)

The booster that Space X grabbed on its descent was about 70 metres
long, or as large as a 20-storey building. The booster slowed itself
down from its initial supersonic speeds before it was clutched. Boosters
usually just fall into the sea. 

But if they can be reused, it would significantly lower the cost of
space missions. If that is the most exciting part of the booster-grab,
then I am especially disappointed as an Indian because we can send a
rocket up cheaper than Space X, even if our boosters just fall off.

My quarrel is that, as an innovation, the descent of a booster is not
much superior to the ascent of a rocket, especially with a human crew on
board that has to be taken to a precise location and brought back. 

Also, even in rocketry, a booster grab is far more modest than the
performance of Israel’s iron dome, which can intercept hundreds of
missiles, including hypersonic ballistic missiles, the kind Iran rained
on Israel a few weeks ago. Also, we landed on the Moon in 1969, and did
not repeat the feat because it was not worth the expense.

The fact that in 2024 the guided descent of a rocket booster into the
waiting hands of an iron structure qualifies as a great scientific
spectacle of our times at once reveals and hides the fact that modern
science is a big disappointment, especially to its own initial promise.

It’s not that present-day science isn’t impressive at all. For example,
modern hacking is ingenious—you receive a phone call, not even answer
it, and still end up with a virus that takes over your phone. 

Almost everything Israel uses to defend itself is impressive technology,
and much of the best warfare science today is beyond public knowledge.

But the achievements of modern science have been modest in furthering
our understanding of the nature of reality (considering how much we
knew, say, by 1910), and in our quality of life, especially in medical
sciences, whose hype comes from their ability to prolong death instead
of rejuvenating the human body.

Today, if you wish to live well, science cannot guide you in any
specific way. It can only offer a broad direction, not very different
from the advice of a wise old woman if you don’t count her attempts to
push her high-carb sweets. In 2024, you still have to go through a
process of trial and error to figure out what works for you.

Science has stagnated in areas like air travel not because it does not
know how to fly you faster. We have the tech to shoot you into space
from Delhi and bring you down over New York just about two hours later. 

It is just that we have not found a way to do it cheaply enough for
commercial application. Even so, the fact that our grandfathers and we
travel at the same speed across the world is a failure of science.

Why has science disappointed? There is a defence that incremental
breakthroughs in a field get difficult over time. But there is an unsung
reason.

Science may have mojo, but scientific research is often tedious, even
boring. Across the world, smart young people now have many options for
how to lead their lives. Even in India, upper-class parents no longer
pressure their children to pursue lucrative unhappy careers. 

You don’t have to do something anymore just because you are very good at
it; you can follow your ‘passion,’ which is often something in the
arts. 

As a result, some people who might have been great engineers may be
making terrible but honest movies, or those who would have been
marvellous biologists might be working on the best way to compress a
video file.

You could argue that there are enough people in the world, and even if
some opt out of the tedious aspects of science, there are still plenty
of others eager to pursue them. However, extraordinary breakthroughs
typically come not from systems, but from the ingenious insights of
extraordinary individuals. 

I worry that the scientist capable of a breakthrough that could vastly
improve my quality of life when I’m 90 might be working at SpaceX,
figuring out how to catch a rocket booster instead.
