# Alice Munro reported from inside the heads of women

*2024-05-19*

She died on 13 May at the age of 92. When she was awarded the Nobel
prize for literature in 2013, she became the first person to receive the
honour exclusively for short stories, and one of the very few laureates,
I feel, who were easy to read and a delight.

Her common analysis of herself as a writer was that she was a woman who
was primarily interested in the lives of women and what women
experienced. The result was not always compassion for women; but also
something sterner, something more useful.

The narrator in her short story Friend of my Youth tells us, “…mother
had grown up in a time and a place when sex was a dark undertaking for
women. She knew that you could die from it. So, she honoured the
decency, the prudery, the frigidity, that might protect you. And I grew
up in horror of that very protection, the dainty tyranny that seemed to
me to extend to all areas of life, to enforced tea parties and white
gloves and all other sorts of tinkling inanities. I favoured bad words
and a breakthrough, I teased myself with the thought of a man’s
recklessness and domination."

She did write the male point of view sometimes. I don’t know what it is
about the male characters of even great female writers, but these men
make fine observations about curtains and upholstery. For instance, this
moment in the short story, The Bear Came Over the Mountain: “Grant
caught sight of two layers of front-window curtains, both blue, one
sheer and one silky, a matching blue sofa and a daunting pale carpet…"

Munro was kind to men, even considerate perhaps. When she reveals that
Grant, who is married to the central character of the story, used to
have affairs with his students, Munro appears to explain that it was
very good for his spirits: “What he felt was mainly a gigantic increase
in well-being… He ran up steps two at a time. He appreciated as never
before a pageant of torn clouds and winter sunsets seen from his office
window, the charm of antique lamps… Come summer, he learned the names of
flowers."

Munro has said that when she started writing, only women read stories
and men did something seemingly more important outside their homes. This
contributed to her initial success around a time when the most
influential writers in Canada were all men. Even today, I am certain
that most of Munro’s readers are women. Most readers of stories are
women. They are the primary readers of men, too.

Male writers, in general, do not believe that they write about men, or
that they are primarily interested in the lives of men. They would claim
that their interest is wider and universal, about humans and not gender.
They might be more wrong than they think, nevertheless most of their
readers are women. The literary success of men is often a reward given
by women.

In a previous column, I had written that women appreciate the works of
men, they are generous to exceptional men, but men, in general, do not
engage much with the works of exceptional women. It is this gap in
generosity that partly finances the progress of men. A similar imbalance
in interest favours the West and its artists. 

We engage more with their works than they do with ours. In this
imbalance, Munro is a beneficiary. Indians who have never read a single
Indian short story may have read Munro. She may not have read any book
by an Indian. But her elevation to greatness might have a more
interesting reason.

She has been successful for about five decades, even acclaimed now and
then, but the literary establishment began to call her a legend less
than 20 years ago, when she was in her 70s. This happens to many
artists, and not because they do their best work in old age.

Greatness is not defined by sales figures. It is not a democratic vote.
The establishment picks the greats. And establishment writers are
usually reluctant to praise their peers. Asked to name the greatest
among them, they pick someone who is not one of them. 

Sometimes they pick a safe foreigner, or a person from the oppressed
classes, but often they pick an old person. This is how Meryl Streep is
the world’s “greatest actress" and why many Indian writers would pick
R.K. Narayan as “the greatest" and the West came to rate Alice Munro as
the world’s best short-story writer.

Munro appeared to see her rise to greatness with a detached amusement.
She began writing in her spare time, in between raising her children and
running a home. Many writers secretly feel that they are the world’s
best ever, even though they may not have had the chance to read every
writer. 

I get the feeling Munro was not someone who harboured such views about
herself. When she spoke of herself, it was with a degree of
self-effacement that was very persuasive. From the way she spoke about
the process of writing and writing itself, I often got the feeling that
she really did not consider literature the most important thing. I could
never grasp, though, what mattered the most to her.
