# A right that women don’t have is the right to mediocrity

*2024-12-01*

There is an implication in this view that one has to be exceptional to
become America’s leader or reach the top of other fields. Yet, they
would struggle to list what is exceptional about Trump. A way of the
world is that it punishes the ordinariness of women and is more
understanding of the mediocrity of successful men.

A right that women do not have is the right to mediocrity. I call it a
right because it is what most people are, by definition, and people have
the right to be themselves.

There was a Trump before Trump, and her name was Sarah Palin, a former
governor of Alaska who was a vice-presidential nominee when John McCain
ran for president. She once said that she could see Russia from her
house in Alaska. She said things an average person would.

While Trump was rewarded for that quality of discourse, she did not
survive the torrent of ridicule.

The word ‘mediocrity’ has come to mean something demeaning, but it is
intended to describe something between excellence and terrible—the
common output of an average person. Ideally, a characteristic of most
people, their ordinariness, should not be held against them.

And it is often not held against male leaders. If anything, their
ordinariness makes them endearing to others. But when female leaders
slip up, or are just dour or mediocre in other ways, they face much more
severe scrutiny.

When feminists speak of what the world does not grant or allow women,
they often speak of how exceptional women are not given opportunities.
In my view, this is not true. It is hard for the world to suppress
exceptional women because it is in the self-interest of society to let
them thrive.

In any case, exceptional people are rare, and they constitute a tiny
proportion of women, too. The real bias against women is in how the
world perceives the ordinariness of ordinary women as opposed to the
ordinariness of ordinary men. All around us are ordinary men in
leadership positions getting away with being ordinary.

The movement to set things right for women had no choice but to glorify
success and brilliance. As a result, it is easier today for a man to be
unambitious, to choose an ordinary, quiet and healthy life, while it is
complex for a woman to overtly say that she wants to achieve nothing.

Even Barbie had to become more than an alluring girlfriend and get
dressed in career uniforms and other ambiguous clothes of success.
Mediocrity is not only about the capacity of one’s mind; it is also
about the ordinariness of aspiration.

Most people do not aspire to anything extraordinary, and it is easier
for men to be that way or even say that they want to be that way. In the
film Barbie, a character tells the CEO of Barbie’s maker Mattel that it
should create an ordinary Barbie who just wants to be a mom.

But the film is nervous to state what it seems keen to say: that women
have a right to be ordinary.

There is a stigma attached to mediocrity and even to wishing for an
ordinary life. The very bias against women is routed through allegations
of their ordinariness; so their champions feel they should never speak
of that.

As a result, no one speaks of the actual place where the bias is cruel,
where a woman has no defence because what she is accused of may be true,
even if it is an unfair charge because a man in her position would get
away with it.

When I say that exceptional people are rare, I mean that exceptional
people are rare among the successful. Being exceptional is not the
prerequisite for success that the world pretends it is.

The educational system, self-help books and motivational talks all
suggest that people must prepare to be exceptional to succeed. But
people succeed because of ordinary reasons like social networks and dumb
luck and because they are so ordinary that they are likeable, fun and
belong to a tribe.

While there are advantages to being ordinary, there are drawbacks too.
Ordinary people are sometimes caught out of depth. That happens all the
time to men in power, but they survive unscathed compared to women in
the same position.

At first glance, it may appear that Indian female politicians are an
exception. Isn’t it true that the Indian public forgives their failings?
Some women have held real power for many years and still do.

I grew up in Tamil Nadu, where J. Jayalalithaa defeated powerful men and
held on to power for long. That could happen, I believe, because her
gender was not a factor in her political appeal. Women knew that they
were voting for a woman, but men had to deify her, as someone more than
just a woman, to grant her power over them.

As a politician, she was enormously popular at one point. But when the
aura began to fade and her popularity began to slip, when she was faced
with corruption charges and could not stave off her political
adversaries, she fell faster and harder than men because suddenly she
was revealed as a mortal woman, and questions of her mediocrity in
ethics had a greater consequence.

The bias against ordinary women exists only in roles that were
traditionally held by men. For instance, the captain of a female
football team will not be particularly vilified for her ordinariness.
Nor a housewife for her ordinariness within the boundaries of what is
expected of her in this role.

 

 
