# The spectacle of the West is as interesting as it ever was

*2024-06-30*

The vacation was highly enjoyable, probably because of my company, but I
gave primary credit to the concept of leisure travel, and I thought I
must travel more and further, and for no better reason than to be
elsewhere. But I wouldn’t go on such a vacation for another two years.
The first time I took a flight for a vacation was when I was 32. And I
am not that old at all.

Since then, I have been on numerous trips. Once, I saw people kayaking
and thought it looked fun. I found a kayak, and realized that its
seeming fun is entirely a triumph of imagination. It didn’t match the
actual experience, like many things in life. Every time I see people
having fun, I recall that kayak.

I did enjoy most vacations somewhat, but I never fully understood them.
I didn’t consider them “a break" because I don’t understand the concept.
A real break, to me, means a break from myself, but I’m always there on
my vacations. Also, the idea of going to a beautiful place for a few
days only to return to an ugly Indian city seemed pointless. And I never
took seriously the idea of going somewhere to breathe fresh air. What’s
the point? You always return home.

I have now been to all the continents, including Antarctica (though that
was on work). And I am yet to fully see the point of tourism. I do enjoy
it, but I can see why ancient people never did it. It is particularly
pointless if you are a happy person, so your head is a resort anyway and
you do not need to flee your life. But I do enjoy taking a break from
India.

Only that motive makes sense to me, even though, these days, no matter
where you go, you cannot be free of Indians. I’m in London right now and
it is filled with Indian tourists.

I like visiting the West because I enjoy the spectacle of it. Its people
think they are Bohemian, but they are so orderly. Even a rebellious
hippie follows most civic rules. Watching the West being orderly is like
a circus to me. 

You just stand on a narrow lane and cars stop to let you pass. That
leads to some problems because I tend to just stand on the kerb, with
nowhere to go, and this makes cars wait even as I wonder whether I
should cross. This really infuriates truck drivers and they honk at me.

Anywhere in the West, I can spend hours just watching cars go in their
lanes, especially on bends. They never leave their lane, as though they
are orbiting a sacred moral, forever in the gravitational pull of an
invisible cultural black hole. I wonder at what per capita income level
a society begins to drive in road lanes. Will it ever happen in India,
or is it too late?

Over the past 20 years since I first visited the West, I’ve been told
that its nations suffer from economic gloom. But I have always found the
West filled with street joy. There is laughter and beauty, and if there
is no hope, it does not show. As an Indian, I have a very different
threshold for what despair means.

London is often described as multicultural, which is not entirely true.
Its visible unchanging soul is primarily British and Western. The West
may appear to absorb some alien ways, but its fundamental quality is
that it does not adapt to another culture. 

If it transforms at all, it is because everything transforms over time.
The West does not become other people the way we have become other
people. We know how the West changed us; but if we ask how we changed
the West, we may not find a convincing answer.

The strongest Indian resistance to Western culture is through food. When
Indians flock to so-called Indian restaurants abroad, they often have a
grimace as they eat because they are usually consuming lousy Indian food
at four times the cost. Prices in the West are another spectacle. 

It was an even bigger spectacle when India was cheap and I was poor.
Entering London was like walking into hyperinflation. It was darkly
entertaining, and still is. As an Indian, I have to absorb both local
inflation and the rupee’s further depreciation each time I visit.

An odd thing about people who claim to see the point of tourism is that
they don’t seem to enjoy it as much as I do. It is easy to see the
suffering of many middle-class Indian tourists. As things are, family
vacations are fraught with risk because the family moves from a large
space to a squished hotel room. 

They have to face each other for long hours without respite. One of the
unspoken truths about human beings is that most of them cannot take full
exposure to family for more than four hours a day. Particularly
miserable are families who travel with infants. Without domestic help,
they end up toiling on vacation. 

And the only person who suffers less than at home is the baby, who will
not remember anything. My unsolicited advice to new parents is that they
should not waste money on a foreign holiday unless their child develops
memory space.

Over the past 20 years, the Indian tourist has become somewhat more
comfortable dealing with people of the West, especially the swag of the
Western underclass. Still, many Indians visiting the West seem
suffocated by all the order and quality and need to behave themselves at
all times. I get the feeling that Indians visit Indian restaurants
partly to scream at Indian waiters, as some kind of cultural relief.
