# India’s Olympic Games shame is not about sports at all

*2024-07-21*

But at the summer edition, India will be exposed. We may win some
medals, but they would be very few, and most of our embarrassments come
when our achievements are measured against a population of over a
billion. But India’s sporting mediocrity should not be what shames us.
It’s something else.

In any case, Indians have devised a way to handle shame—it’s a
relatively new form of expressing shame, which does not look like shame
at all. It is a hysterical sense of pride at any Indian triumph. And so
it will probably happen again as some Indians win some medals and the
nation goes berserk.

Humans exempt emotions from analysis because if emotions are analysed,
we would find it very hard to be emotional. If you look at what the
country’s contribution is to the success of an Indian athlete, it would
be even more embarrassing than our medal tally.

India used to treat its finest athletes very poorly. In fact, during
state-level tournaments, they used to be put up in parked railway
coaches. Now there is some improvement in the training conditions of
national-level athletes, but if you look at the lowest rungs of Indian
sports, from where future athletes emerge, the conditions are horrible.

You ask any parent of any social class whose child has some kind of
sporting talent in any of the Olympic disciplines, you will hear stories
of how poorly competitions are organized, how filthy and unsafe the
facilities are. Children are made to wait for hours in the sun as
officials arrive late. 

A few weeks ago, there were state-level under-15 swimming events in
Gurgaon—in outdoor pools while temperatures soared to 45° Celsius. It
takes only some humaneness and not even organizational competence to
host such events in cooler months or build indoor pools. India is not so
poor anymore, but it treats its citizens as though they are poor. It’s
extraordinary that not many children die during such sporting events.

That is why I say that the very existence of Indian athletes of global
calibre is not because of India, but in spite of India. The shirts of
Indian athletes should not say ‘India’ but ‘Despite India.’ And the most
thrilling aspect of Indian athletes who triumph at the Olympics is that
they are so exceptional that despite everything India threw at them,
they reached so far.

Members of the middle class usually opt out of this sporting torment and
instead become consumers of national pride through the efforts of poorer
people. Like they employ drivers and gardeners, they also employ the
poor to overcome the realities of India and somehow triumph against
other nations.

The Olympics is filled with farce. For instance, the amusing anthems of
nations, which are usually mediocre hyperbolic songs written by poets
close to the establishment that claim exactly what those nations are
not. But the games do reveal a great truth—how undeserving India is of
sporting glory. Even so, the lack of sporting prowess is not our real
shame.

The pride of most nations at the Olympics is misplaced. By one measure,
the US and a few other Western countries have a hand in most of the
medals won by other nations, including China. Because in most
disciplines, serious athletes have a shot at excellence only if they are
trained by ‘foreign’ coaches, which usually means Western coaches, using
Western systems. 

So the Olympics are in reality a triumph of the West and how the world
has surrendered to a way of life where the West holds all the cards. The
West partly finances its sporting excellence through its economic might,
by becoming a beacon for legal and illegal migrants. How then can the
Olympics medal tally be a measure of national pride?

What should credibly and convincingly shame India is that India is still
not advanced enough to host the games. Now that is very relevant to our
lives because hosting the Olympics is also a measure of how liveable the
host city is.

The International Olympic Council has specific requirements—the host
city should have about 40,000 hotel rooms of varying degrees of high
quality, and high-quality roads and public transportation, and
international-grade sporting venues. No Indian city qualifies, even
though India has been making noises about bidding to host the Olympics.
The only city that could come close is Delhi and even that seems like an
outside chance.

The biggest sporting spectacle we hosted was the Commonwealth Games in
Delhi in 2010. Indian sports officials were accused of embezzling
crores, the venues were not ready until very late, the chief executive
of the games federation, Mike Hooper, said that the Games Village was
filthy and unfit for humans. 

An Indian games official defended the country by saying that Indians and
the West had different hygiene standards. Also, the ceiling of a stadium
collapsed. India spent billions of dollars to buy prestige but ended up
exposing its true nature to the world.

The fact is that no part of India qualifies to make a serious bid for
the Olympics. It should be a reminder that we live in conditions that
are among the worst in the world. The way India treats us, it is as
though we are all athletes.
