# Escaping India within India is an exorbitant exercise

*2024-12-22*

People tell me that some flats there cost
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>100 crore each. For no fault of mine, a
few days ago, a broker sent me a news clipping that said a
16,000-square-foot penthouse in the building sold for
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>190 crore.

That apartment building makes me chuckle, especially when I see it in
the smog. I chuckle in my head. I don’t think anyone chuckles aloud when
they are alone.

But I don’t know yet why it is funny, at least not very clearly. Maybe
it is because the building reminds me that the experience of being
super-rich in India is one of the most overpriced things in the world.

In the best areas of London or New York, you pay a premium for what the
city offers, and what the city offers is available to everyone. In
India, it is the opposite. The city is the problem, and you pay to shut
it out, along with most Indians.

I wonder what it is about money that it does not help one escape the
miseries of this country—the air and traffic congestion of its vast
urban cancers that keep growing. Could class have helped them?

Class is many things, and for an Indian, it is also the ability to be at
home in the West, enduring its alien food and surface equality of all.
Even though the world has changed, even though new money does not aspire
to class anymore, there is plenty of the good life that can come only
with class.

Some people tell me that not all the people who have bought flats in
that tower actually live there. But many do, and among those who don’t,
most of them still live in India, in similar places. In any case, no one
disputes that most of India’s wealthiest people do live in India, even
though a few may have bought Western citizenships.

People also tell me that the kind of people who live in that building in
the smog have many homes across the world. But this characterization of
the rich comes from those who are not as rich.

People may own many houses, but they usually have one home. The
perception of home is the same across people of varying wealth levels. A
home, by definition, need not be a single house, but it usually is. It
is made up of people, love and compulsions.

And these are not as portable as people think, even for the rich. A home
is where you are stranded. Only a home can have good reasons to keep you
there. It can even keep you in a dismal grey town from where you escape
now and then, but only to always return.

Also, India’s super-rich get to feel like monarchs only in India and in
other poor countries.

I have been inside that building. Its residents invited me once to speak
there—in a plush theatre. They showed me their unmatched spa and heated
pools. It is a place designed to escape India within India. Good life in
India is an archipelago of private islands. Even the upper middle
classes live like this—on islands.

When affluent Indians pay for a home or lifestyle, they do not pay for
the value of the thing but for the promise that India cannot enter it,
at least not easily. India enters as GST, but otherwise, the human
embodiment of real India is highly regulated. That is what most of the
multi-crore price is for.

It’s not just homes, but also schools, resorts, restaurants and even
cinemas that are in reality clubs that keep real India out.

But the price is just about right for the upper middle class. For
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>5-10 crore, one can find a home in a
beautiful Gurgaon colony where most of India is stopped at the gates.

Women can walk without worry and children find safe ground. Even this is
slightly overpriced because it is comparable to the price of a home of
similar size in, say, Brooklyn.

But the super-rich have to pay inordinate amounts, not only to claim to
be rich in India, but also to live and feel like rich people and
exorcise the spirit of real India. They either build an entire
skyscraper for themselves or live in those buildings in the smog, paying
atrocious amounts. After paying so much, they still cannot entirely
escape India.

The upper middle class has developed ways of exclusion that cost nothing
or very little. They use what is called “culture" and a bit of
sophistication to exclude most Indians from their daily lives. In the
Madras of my childhood, for instance, it was classical music and dance.

The upper middle class also uses high education and narrow
specializations to nurture exclusive clubs where the other India simply
has no chance to present itself.

The super-rich, on the other hand, only have money. And money has long
divorced class, so some old-money people with class do not see the
luxury in having to share their enchanting social circuits with others
who have money today.

The super-rich across the world face a general problem. Capitalism,
ironically, does not serve its true masters well. There are simply no
real products for the very wealthy that only they can afford and enjoy.
The best phone, cinema or even holiday is available to the merely
affluent.

So the super-rich are sold outlandish lemons—like a risky journey to the
edge of Earth’s atmosphere packaged as “space," or to the depths of the
ocean to see an old wreckage.

But at least the billionaires of the West can dabble in longevity
science or bet on politics without facing ruin if their bets turn bad.
The super-rich of Gurgaon only have a building in the smog.
