# Why disgrace is unlikely to erode the allure of Harvard

*2024-01-08*

A few days ago, the president of Harvard University resigned in
disgrace. There is a perception among cultural observers in America that
the episode has eroded Harvard’s prestige. That cannot be true. Disgrace
does not diminish an exclusive club. That is not how prestige works.
What ends prestige is, in fact, equality.

After Hamas slaughtered over a thousand Israelis in a single day,
wounded over 3,400, and raped an unknowable number, there was widespread
denouncement across US universities. Not of Hamas, but of Israel. In
political turmoil, university students tend to back the poorer player
when their own stakes in the region are very low. But their timing was
atrocious. Their protests against Israel began just hours after the
massacre. There was another factor at play. Humanitarians have invented
sustainable ways to disguise hatred. On American campuses, a dislike for
Jews, who have an outsized political influence, can masquerade as love
for Palestinians. All this was in full flow in the Ivy League, including
Harvard University, whose president Claudine Gay failed to stop extreme
posturing against Israel. Influential Jews responded by hitting where it
hurts most—donations. They also levelled charges of “anti-Semitism"
against some varsities. In a Congressional hearing, when Gay was asked
whether calls for genocide against Jews on Harvard’s campus violated its
rules on bullying and harassment, she said it depends on “the context."
As the face of Harvard, her testimony was a disaster. But she somehow
kept her job. Oddly, what brought her stint to an end was the less grave
charge that many years ago, in her scholarly works, she had lifted whole
paragraphs from the works of other people.

Not just Gay, Harvard too has emerged poorly from the turmoil. But that
does not affect its allure for most of the social and economic elite of
America and the rest of the world. The weak moral intellect of an
exclusive club is not something that repels most aspiring members of the
club.

The myth of the Ivy League is that these colleges seek only exceptional
students. The world has seen many duds from these universities. Even so,
the nature of the world is to give an exclusive club a long rope. Even
most people who denounce the Ivy League have some complicated respect
for them. There are some whose disdain is honest, who truly do not want
to join overrated clubs, but they are very few.

In 2019, news broke that some parents had paid millions of dollars in
bribes to secure Ivy League admissions for their wards. Even this did
not diminish the lure of these big brands. In fact, the scandal put a
financial price on the abstract idea of being a legitimate Ivy League
student.

There was a time when the best colleges in the world attracted the best
students. In the West, it was a long time ago, in the golden age of the
elites when only they had access to quality in any walk of life. Their
haunts do not hold the same promise now. But all prestige needs is
social exclusivity in the guise of intellectual exclusivity. People
grant this halo to a handful of institutes, despite recurring evidence
that a typical individual who passes out of these clubs is ordinary or
worse, or successful only by the dint of being born in the right home
that equips him with exceptional social contacts.

Everything that seems unfair about the luck of the average person who
walks into an Ivy League is what makes it alluring. To give an
impression of fairness, the Ivy League simulates equality by seeking
something that sounds like equality but is not— ‘diversity.’ This is
generally an expanded colour palette of cream. With some exceptions, it
is the privileged among African-Americans, Hispanics, Indians and
Chinese who have the best shot at an Ivy League. Diversity in a system
only expands the cultural diversity of its snobs.

If disgrace and mediocrity cannot affect the lure of a prestigious club,
what ends prestige? Prestige is not eternal. The moment an exclusive
club is breached by an alarming number of the poor and lower middle
class, the elite stop applying, and then a college is suddenly not
prestigious anymore. This is what happened to many elite Indian
colleges. They followed a socially just system for admissions—an
entrance exam. That is not how Harvard screens. It has opaque processes.
But in India, rising economic democracy, especially for necessities like
food and schooling, created a surge of poor and lower-middle-class
applicants for engineering, medicine and civil services. Upper-class
students could not compete anymore. Once, IITs had among the finest
quizzers, writers and music bands. Now people have filled those places
who did not have the luxury of pursuing things that have no point. So
the IITs have lost their allure among upper classes, who find it easier
to enter colleges in the West.

Why is it that when social equality helps the less fortunate gain access
to a prestigious club, it ceases to be prestigious? Because prestige is
not about that hollow thing called ‘merit’; it is always about the
fellowship of an aristocracy.

This principle is at play not only in economics. Take, for instance, the
scaling of Mount Everest. Its prestige has been diminished by economic
democracy that has made the feat possible for numerous ordinary people,
including the disabled.

So what can ruin Harvard is not some disgrace here and there or the
mediocrity of its alumni. Harvard will be ruined when its admission
process becomes socially just.
