# India has become too rich to let petty clerks torment people

*2025-01-12*

I learnt that the site of the Unique Identification Authority of India
(UIDAI) has been partially down for months.

The site would have been kinder to me if it were entirely down, but its
cruelty is in drawing me to fill out all the numbers, including the
exact second when biometric data was given, and then saying, “We’re
unable to process your request due to temporary outages of our
services."

For weeks, the same message. It’s a vital site, but has been this way
for months.

A tout told me that I would get an Aadhaar number if I paid
<span class="webrupee">₹</span>4,000. So, I wonder, though I have no
evidence beyond the experience of being an Indian, if there is a
connection between the site being partially down and the subterranean
system that charges a fee to get the job done.

It is the same with many other government services, like the renewal of
a driver’s licence. Everything is supposed to be ‘online,’ but nothing
is. The link is always down, but a tout can get things done.

Also, I suspect that the poor are not as harassed as the upper-middle
class because we can pay more in bribes. (A system that is corrupt for
the rich but efficient for the poor could make it look as though the
process is clean.)

I know people who have been denied Aadhaar on account of ‘glitches,’
which magically get sorted once they pay a bribe. One couple who tried
to get a number for their minor son were told their documents were
rejected because the school’s seal was a rectangle and not a circle.

Foreigners teaching in an international school who needed Aadhaar
numbers to access their bank accounts ran around for weeks trying to get
these, until they realized that someone had to be paid off.

Why are simple things so difficult in India? I can understand and even
accept many of the consequences of living in a mostly poor country. In
return for cheap labour that makes middle-class existence feel like
affluence, we face third-world problems.

But I do feel that a lot of misery in India caused by petty corruption
is unnecessary. No public hardship is necessary, but there is a natural
sort caused by a paucity of funds and infrastructure. There is another
sort of daily suffering Indians go through that is possible for India to
abolish.

There was a time we could not have done it; India was too
under-developed. But not anymore. There is no reason why petty clerks
should be allowed to inflict so much misery.

There is a traffic signal in my neighbourhood that I am sure is also
gamed. Its red light lasts 180 seconds, and its green light lasts for
20. Across the junction, cops hide behind objects.

They wait for an outraged motorist to violate a red light. I think there
is a direct connection between the short green light and the hidden
cops.

Many of India’s petty miseries that lower our quality of life are
unnecessary, by which I mean that people in power can easily solve them
without a drop in their material well-being. We can understand this
better by thinking about the big problems that we cannot actually solve.

Some reforms seem almost impossible. For example, it routinely takes 90
minutes to two hours to commute between Delhi and Gurgaon. It is a
problem that India cannot solve immediately because it was caused by an
ingrained inability to plan well ahead of time.

Also, a smooth flow of traffic requires roads and metro systems that can
cost thousands of crores, and policies that limit the use of private
cars. The same goes for air pollution. These are complex problems that
cannot be resolved quickly.

But many of our public miseries are not caused by India’s economic
state. Our backwardness is not anymore caused by our low income.

There is, in fact, a region that does not have many of the problems that
India faces, and it has a higher quality of life than most of the
country in the form of clean air, food and healthcare; yet, it does not
have an income level that is significantly higher than rest of the
nation: Kerala.

If this state were a nation, it would be a proper middle-income Asian
nation, with almost all its human indices outperforming India’s. Barring
buses, Kerala’s public utilities are excellent, including government
hospitals and schools.

One of the cleanest Olympic-sized swimming pools I have seen was a
public pool in Thiruvananthapuram. And it cost almost nothing to swim
there. In all of Kerala, there is cleanliness. Also, hygienic cheap
food. The state has some problems, but they are not caused by government
clerks.

As a nation progresses, a time comes when petty corruption ceases to
exist without altering the prospects of the country’s most powerful
people. In nations like China, the powerful were enriched by putting an
end to petty corruption.

We can see a bit of this in how Indian politicians have generally moved
up the value chain. In the Madras of my childhood, politicians
controlled water tankers, bought land and ran marriage halls. Senior
cops owned autorickshaw networks.

Today, they have more sophisticated investments. As the powerful move
up, they are supposed to clean up petty corruption at lower levels. This
is not for ethical reasons, but out of self-interest. This is how
advanced economies have prospered, and how smart middle-income nations
are moving ahead.

India doesn’t do even corruption well.

 
