# Why movies that win Oscars are no longer enjoyable

*2025-05-04*

Most working people are in marketing, one way or another, whether or not
their department is called ‘Marketing.’ Also, most of the world’s people
are not in the arts. Yet, art has some of the world’s best marketing,
though it is not known as marketing, and is free. Think of awards or
ceremonies of ‘recognition.’ Who is ‘recognizing’ the artist? A small
group of people who are considered more discerning than most of the
world. Yet this ‘recognition’ impresses most of the world. Though not as
forcefully as before.

Many awards have lost their influence as the world has lost its
reverence for pundits. The Academy Awards for films are not chosen by
them, which is perhaps why they have endured. Thousands of the Academy’s
active members vote, and those members are mostly people who have
written, directed, produced or edited films or acted in them, or
participated in filmmaking in other ways. These Awards, also known as
the Oscars for reasons lost to history, are the world’s most useful
awards. Yet, even they are in decline.

Last month, the American Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
implemented a rule change for the next awards—that members must watch
all nominated films in a category to be eligible to vote in the final
round for that category. This means many of them have been voting
without watching all the films—or perhaps any. This points to something
charlatan-like. But it is not the most important or interesting reason
why the Academy Awards have lost some of their mojo.

A criticism of the Academy Awards in recent years has been that they now
champion films that are dull, with no wide audience appeal, or are just
ordinary. I have a theory why this may be happening. It has something to
do with the crooked nature of peer-review, and how people tend to
compensate for their mental frailties.

In the past, the power of Academy Awards came from the fact that they
were the only major awards that did not celebrate pure art; Oscars were
a tribute to middlebrow work. Art is easy. Those who are horrified by
this statement are likely to be those who have no artistic gifts. Art is
easy for those who have talent. What is hard is for the gifted to reach
out to a wide audience. And that was what the Oscars celebrated most of
the time—the triumph of the middle-ground and the mainstream. 

The films they amplified, chiefly through Best Picture award
nominations, were also mainstream or could go mainstream with some push.
Like *Forrest Gump*, which was far from being fast-food for the soul.
Artistic awards, like the prestigious ones in Europe, tend to celebrate
what they deem high art. In India, as a child, I used to associate art
cinema with a dejected woman combing her hair as water boiled.

Today, the Best Picture Oscars have drifted into the ambiguous terrain
of ‘art cinema.’ This sometimes gives us a spectacular film, but more
often holds up insipid works that are assumed to have artistic merit
because they are dull. As a result, some Oscar picks today are not
popular films. Why is this happening?

One reason is that when a notable person in any industry is asked who is
the best in his field, he usually does not name a remarkable peer; he
would rather name a celebrated veteran who is not competition or a
debutant. When cricketers are asked to name the all-time great, they
almost never pick a contemporary but someone from history. Or someone
who is so obscure that he poses no direct competition. 

This is also why when you ask present-day actors who the greatest actor
is, they are likely to name someone from an earlier era. This is also
the reason why it is fun to ask Indian writers in English who their
favourite Indian writer is—they are most likely to name R.K. Narayan,
even though most of them won’t have read him seriously. Kiran Nagarkar,
too, featured very often. Obscure regional writers also get named.

The Oscars are the world’s most influential peer-reviewed honour. It
would be absurd to think that bias does not seep in. That is why obscure
and ‘diverse’ films and filmmakers surface now and then.

The other reason for the influx of films with no wide appeal, especially
in the Best Picture nominations, is that a disease that usually affects
small-jury awards has begun to afflict the Oscars. The assumption is
that the more dreary a work is, the more artistic merit it carries.

A work of pure art need not be entertaining, but it is also true that
the chief artistic merit of most things being passed off as art is that
they aren’t vulgar enough to entertain. This is what happens when
intellectually frail minds are asked to choose something ‘worthy.’ They
go in search of gravitas—and they find it only in what doesn’t
entertain. It’s like a class of people who rate Rahul Dravid as the
greatest Test cricketer because his cricket was not flamboyant (like
them).

But then why did the Oscars feature more mainstream films before?
Surely, if peer parsimony is human nature, as I claim, it would also go
back a long way in time. I feel that many times in the past, peers did
champion obscure films and filmmakers in the name of artistic value or
diversity, but the world was so simple and the Academy Awards were so
powerful that those films instantly became mainstream. Take *The English
Patient* in 1996. It became mainstream because it won an Oscar for Best
Picture.

Today, as the Academy may discover, ordinary viewers are too
empowered—and distracted—for old institutions to herd them towards films
they don’t enjoy.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*
