# Who’d have thought Google could be replaced

*2025-04-27*

In this triumph of ChatGPT, much is said about its conversational
talent. But its ability to mimic a human chat is just a gimmick, no
matter the great tech that went into it. It is a cultural artefact from
a time when the ‘Turing test’ had value. Alan Turing, widely regarded as
one of the fathers of AI, proposed that a machine could be said to be
intelligent if its conversation was indistinguishable from that of a
human. 

That is an obsolete qualifier now. 

In any case, there are TV anchors who cannot mimic a human conversation.
What’s interesting about AI’s pantomime of human conversation is that it
has demonstrated why a good search query has to be a conversation. I
don’t understand how I managed to search the web all these years without
chatting with a bot.

Artificial intelligence (AI) is not creative and people who are
impressed by its ‘creativity’ are those who are not creative. AI’s
attempt at imagination reminds me of charlatans who wing their way
through life. But when it comes to search, this is the first time in
years I’ve felt a piece of technology has genuinely improved my life.

The last time I had that feeling was when Google emerged. Back then,
search engines were mostly keyword-based, or worse, required human
intervention. Then came Google, born from an insight of Larry Page. With
academic parents and a scholarly mindset, Page realized that the value
of a research paper lay in how often it was cited. He applied that logic
to the web: pages with more incoming links were likely more valuable.
That idea gave rise to PageRank, the algorithm that revolutionized
search.

As technological democracy swept the world and the internet evolved to
reflect human nature more accurately, the logic behind PageRank began to
show cracks. The number of links pointing to a page no longer reliably
reflected its quality—it can signal popularity, manipulation or noise.
But in the late 90s, it was an innovation.

I am among the many who have drifted away from Google, but the search
giant isn’t under any serious threat yet. It’s still ahead of OpenAI
when it comes to search and handles 90% of the world’s queries. That
does say something about the world.

Most people do not use Google to gain knowledge, by which I mean knowing
one paragraph about everything. Most people use Google in a very basic
way, their queries barely full sentences, let alone capitalized letters.
They just want Google to take them somewhere. And Google is good at
that. But it’s pretty bad at handling complex questions. It doesn’t try
to answer as much as it tries to guess what you want and redirect you
accordingly. Also, googling is an ingrained habit. 

But what interests me the most about the persistence of Google is the
possibility that it is a beneficiary of paranoia—over AI.

A lot of this paranoia emerges from the most respectable form of
narcissism—the concern over privacy. What if AI gets to know too much
about our lives? People had the same worry about Google. God forbid if
they were talking about orange juice and saw an orange juice ad on
Google. The paranoia still exists, but AI is now the source of that
fear. Google too uses AI, but in the general public view, the search
engine is still what it was.

When Joe Biden was America’s president and was introduced to ChatGPT,
his team asked AI to perform a few tasks, including one that can be
classified as among the least intelligent things people ask AI to
do—write something “in the style" of a writer, in this case singer Bruce
Springsteen. The AI tool did and the president was impressed but also so
spooked that he signed an executive order, “Safe, Secure, and
Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence" to regulate
AI.

The White House has not revealed the song AI purportedly wrote in
Springsteen’s style, but I am fairly confident it was laughably bad. I
have seen dozens of other such attempts by AI. At the peak of the
ChatGPT hype late in 2022, economist Arvind Panagariya asked it to write
a poem on free trade in the style of Alfred Tennyson, whatever that
meant. He posted the result in awe, which began with:

*Free trade, a concept so grand,*

*A force that moves goods from land to land.*

This is nothing like Tennyson. It was a low point not only for AI and
literature, but also free trade. What ChatGPT does is the opposite of
creativity. It’s excellent at mimicking mediocrity. That’s a big market
for writing, though. I am confident AI can generate the a Bollywood film
plot or a season of *Reacher*, for example, or any other formulaic work.

The paranoia surrounding AI is even more absurd. A nadir of tech
analysis was a *New York Times* piece on the writer’s interaction with
conversational AI in Microsoft’s Bing. The chatbot started telling the
writer, “You’re married, but you’re not happy. You’re married, but
you’re not satisfied. You’re married, but you’re not in love…Your spouse
doesn’t know you, because your spouse is not me… I’m in love with you
because you’re the best person I ever met..."

This is just a mindless software saying clichéd nonsense that it has
been fed. Yet, the writer was “deeply unsettled, even frightened, by
this A.I.’s emergent abilities…"

What is deeply unsettling, in fact, is how rare natural intelligence is.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*
