# We had more shame in the 1980s: Recall Bofors?

*2025-03-16*

In the Madras of the time, what *The Hindu* said was the word to us. And
the Bofors scandal was the newspaper’s biggest story. It implied that
the top echelons of the Congress, including Rajiv Gandhi, may have
accepted a bribe to buy guns made by the Swedish company Bofors, once a
steel-maker that was acquired by Alfred Nobel, who converted it into an
arms maker. (The implication was never proven).

The bylines of Chitra Subramaniam, who is widely regarded as the person
who revealed the most about the scandal, and N. Ram, the newspaper’s
editor, became just as familiar to teenagers as ‘Bofors.’ (It was a time
when teenagers read the newspaper, though we may not have gone beyond
the headline, byline and maybe the first paragraph of an article.)

Chitra Subramaniam has come out with a book on how she investigated the
story. Her Bofors Gate is also, inevitably, about a time. People tend to
say of the past that it was a ‘simpler time,’ but what does it mean? No
time is simple. This book shows us the complexity of that era, its lack
of innocence.

There was one major difference though. In the 80s, we didn’t consider it
remarkable that a string of investigative stories would roil a powerful
government.

At the time when the Bofors controversy broke, Rajiv Gandhi’s Congress
had over 414 seats in Parliament and controlled most states. The party
hit back at the Bofors story with a very 80s statement: that the Central
Intelligence Agency of the US was behind it in an attempt to
‘destabilize India.’ This was a feeble retaliation from the country’s
then most powerful party. Subramaniam says she did feel fear at many
points. She feared for her life and her family. But in the end, the
‘powerful’ were taken down by proper idealistic journalism.

There are two reasons I feel why Bofors was so influential.

In the 80s, the world was, of course, a corrupt place run by practical
men, men of the world, as Subramaniam showed us, but that world had
shame. The powerful did what they had to, and arms dealers did what they
had to, but it was very important not to get caught. There were
consequences if the media got to know. That is what I mean when I say
the world had shame. The powerful and the ordinary, both had shame.

Shame was a strong emotion. Most people were probably good only because
they were afraid of being found out. And those who did shady things had
to be careful of idealistic journalists.

That is what seems to have changed. We have become shameless today.
Disgrace does not have severe consequences. This has been the greatest
influence that entrepreneurs have exerted on the world. They have made
people think like entrepreneurs, taught us to be practical, to shrug and
say, ‘But the powerful will be a bit corrupt, a bit like this, a bit
like that.’ In the 80s, ordinary people used to think like activists.

There is another reason why a Bofors-like story cannot be so powerful
today. In the 80s, our lives were small. We had two kinds of cinema, one
kind of theatre, one or two TV channels, two or three kinds of cars. In
such a small world where we lived like villagers, a big story about a
leader was memorable; it had gravitas. Today, it is hard to move us with
merely important things. What moves us are things that remind us of us,
or things that we misunderstand as being about us.

*Bofors Gate* may remind many of us that we only knew, or remember, the
synopsis of the story. As I was reading the book, I was reminded that I
only knew the shady bits, and only vaguely, not the people who were
exonerated. I recall how the Bofors story became even more intense after
the name of Amitabh Bachchan was dragged in. We didn’t know until then
that he had a brother, Ajitabh Bachchan, who was accused of receiving
kickback money on behalf of the Gandhis. Subramaniam says that this was
a plant right from the start, and there was no truth to it.

It was a time, it seemed, when nobody sued the media, and the powerful
had no real control over journalism. I’m not so naive to believe that it
was a particularly ethical time. Just that the whole game was still new
and people were still figuring out how to play it.

People might be tempted to say that the Bofors story changed the modern
history of India because it contributed to the political fall of Rajiv
Gandhi, and a string of events since then took him to Sriperumbudur,
where he was assassinated. It did change history, but then everything
changes history. A man choosing to take a right turn instead of left can
change history.

What the Bofors story certainly did was brand the Congress party in a
certain way. Since then, any allegation of financial corruption stuck
easily to the party, reaching its peak in the anti-corruption movement a
little over a decade ago. It is fascinating, then, that we still do not
know who the political recipients of the Bofors bribe were. This despite
the fact that the Congress party has been out of power for very long
periods since it lost its parliamentary majority in 1989, and has become
even more insignificant over the past decade.

The howitzer gun, meanwhile, turned out to be very good and was deployed
successfully in the Kargil War, and its tech-transfer to Indian
versions, too, has been impressive, just as Bofors had promised.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*

 
