# Where our freedom of speech came from and where it went

*2025-03-30*

A few years ago, someone got in touch with me asking if I would agree to
be part of an interview series where authors are interviewed in front of
a live audience by a person who has never read a book. I immediately
agreed because I knew that this interviewer had to be interesting just
for admitting that he doesn’t read books. That is how I first met Kunal
Kamra, who has since emerged as one of the most endearing and
consequential comedians in the world. In tribute to his most recent
show, a Shiv Sena squad destroyed the venue.

All these years, I was certain that Kamra was yet to read a book. So I
was amused when, during his show, he held a book in his hand. It was the
Constitution of India. He said he could say what he did, including
lampooning the deputy chief minister of Maharashtra, because of the
book.

And I sensed he had not read this one either. Because freedom of
expression is not an absolute right in the Indian Constitution. It is
abridged. It can be denied in the interest of “public order," for
example. The thing is, freedom of expression does not make sense if it
has subjective caveats that can be widely interpreted. To say that you
can say whatever you want as long as public order is not disturbed is
the same as saying you do not have the freedom to express many things
that are worth expressing.

Since the Kamra controversy, there has been a lot of talk around the
fact that India does not have freedom of expression in practice,
anymore. People presume there was a time when we had such a freedom.
There is some truth to that. But where did the right to free speech come
from if not from the Constitution? And where did it go? This is actually
an esoteric freedom. Even though people in some countries take it for
granted, it is not something innately natural to human beings. For
instance, why would a powerful person tolerate a joke or an insult?

One of the most natural things that happen to people is taking offence.
Once you take offence, what you do after you get offended is decided by
how much power you have. If you are a petty writer, you will harm the
person who insulted you from behind the scenes. And if you are the
leader of a political party with street clout, you may want to send some
menacing guys over.

In 2015, after Islamist terrorists opened fire in the Paris office of
the satirical magazine *Charlie Hebdo*, killing 12 people, the Catholic
Pope said, “If my good friend Dr. Gasparri," referring to a person
standing near him on the papal aircraft, “says a curse word against my
mother, he can expect a punch. It’s normal. It’s normal. You cannot
provoke. You cannot insult the faith of others. You cannot make fun of
the faith of others."

His view is what most people have on the matter. The most interesting
and important thing about free speech is that it actually has no vast
public support. Yet, India seemed to have some kind of freedom of
expression earlier.

It came not from any great ideals of the Constitution. It originated
from a very practical place—electoral democracy, where there needed to
be political campaigns and politicians said nasty stuff about other
politicians and the media reported it. From this rowdiness, a system of
satire and comedy came about that was largely self-regulated. Thus, our
freedom of expression came in a roundabout way from politicians.

A public moral generally rises not from the goodness of human beings,
but when powerful people collide. Democracy rose from the aristocracy’s
need to rein in the crown. ‘Independent institutions’ rose from the need
of social elites to balance the tyranny of elections. Privacy rights
originated in an assault on free media, when a wealthy segment of
America went to war against its gossip press.

After Kamra aroused the Shiv Sena’s ire, the strongest support for his
freedom to speak came from Uddhav Thackeray and his son Aaditya
Thackeray (who once pushed for a Rohinton Mistry novel to be dropped
from a university syllabus), who had lost control of their party to the
very man Kamra had insulted. This gives us a hint at how free speech was
created by politicians.

In that way, an esoteric idea like freedom of expression has the
potential to be a mass right almost on par with more natural freedoms,
like the freedom to live, the freedom to own property and the freedom to
practise a religion. But it takes very smart politicians to use it
against all odds. If I were with the Thackerays’ political splinter of
what was once a united Shiv Sena, or with the Congress party, I would
organize an open-mic comedy festival on the streets where people are
invited to roast all politicians. The trade-off of making fun of
politicians in power is that you have to take some hits yourself.

That India is effectively losing its freedom of expression means that a
wide spectrum of opposition parties are forgetting how to use it, or
losing the will to use it. It may also mean that they do not believe in
their electoral prospects enough to take on powerful adversaries. Also,
it could mean that they are unwilling to grant people the freedom
because they are too thin-skinned themselves to tolerate it, even if it
is a useful way to take on their opponents in power.

So, without wide political support, it appears that freedom of
expression is a niche nuisance, something only comedians and artists
want. Actually, even most artists don’t seem to want it; they are just
like others who do not wish to offend. Only some endearing delinquents,
it appears, want that freedom. This reveals a complete lack of political
imagination.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*
