# Narayana Murthy, Subrahmanyan and Jamie Dimon miss something simple about work

*2025-03-09*

About 20 years ago, the five-day week was not common in India. Some
people in an office in Mumbai approached their boss to demand it. The
boss said he had no problem with this very modern global idea; he would
ask the proprietor. But, he said, they should know what the owner would
probably ask. “So the work that takes six days now can be done in five?"
If the answer is ‘yes,’ he would consider the office overstaffed,
proceed to sack 17% of the workforce and retain the six-day week for
those who survive.

I don’t think the boss was exaggerating. This is how most owners think
even today, notwithstanding the fact that they have made peace with the
five-day week. They want people to work hard because they believe that’s
what workers should do. And ‘work-from-home’ is not their idea of work. 

A few days ago, Jamie Dimon, chairman and CEO of JP Morgan Chase,
rebuked his employees for resisting his demand to end work-from-home and
return to the five-day week system. Over 1,200 employees had signed a
petition asking for more flexible working hours. 

In an address to the bank’s employees that was leaked on the internet,
he is heard saying that they were too distracted on Zoom, “…looking at
your mail, sending texts to each other… I call a lot of people on
Friday… not a goddamn person to get a hold of… I can’t stand it anymore…
I come in and I’m like, ‘Where’s everybody else?’... We didn’t build
this great company by doing that. By doing the same semi-diseased
\[bleep\] that everybody else does."

Now and then, an Indian business patriarch would say Indians should be
working long hours in office. Infosys founder N.R. Narayana Murthy said
Indians should work 72 hours a week. S.N. Subrahmanyan, chairman and
managing director of Larsen & Toubro, said people should work 90 hours,
including Sundays. Founders and other stakeholders who ask their workers
to work long hours offer themselves as examples—see how much we work,
they say.

This is baffling because they appear to miss something simple about
work. 

Entrepreneurs, like artists, love what they do, or most of it, or why
they do what they do. They suffer when they are on vacation. They have
to apply discipline to stop working some days. In fact, that is what
discipline is. It is a preventive mechanism that the world has
misunderstood. It never works if you need it to do something; discipline
helps in stopping you from doing something you love too much. People who
are forced to exercise cannot be helped by discipline; runners addicted
to running use discipline to reduce runs.

What many business leaders don’t seem to understand is that their
passion is not the same as what workers call ‘work.’ Work is usually so
dreary and repetitive that no one will do it if they are not paid for
it. A salaried person can only take it in moderation. Many of them like
their home only because they have an office to compare it with. Whenever
they are in office, they want to be elsewhere.

Time and again, there’s a rebellion against the very idea of office. Now
and then, technology promises to abolish it. And each time, the office
wins, because bosses like the office and they want everybody to show up,
because it is through the physical presence of the others that they
fully understand what they are the boss of.

People keep rebelling against the office, but the rebellion never gets
them freedom. It just makes slavery more lucrative. You may argue that
work-at-home is a major blow to the idea of office and businesses are
struggling to get workers away from what’s actually a compassionate
idea. The fact is, a compassionate idea does not triumph because it is
compassionate. Instead, it triumphs when it makes economic sense.

Work-from-home began to take shape long before covid. Big companies
wondered if they needed to maintain huge expensive office spaces in
expensive business districts. In fact, about 20 years ago, IBM gave its
employees financial incentives not to come to work. The idea was that
the company would save money per employee if many of them shared a seat
by making their presence scarce. After covid, the idea of work-from-home
appeared to be the future, but this column had predicted even then that
the office will finally prevail.

Many entrepreneurs seem to think there is a correlation between long
hours and output. I find that naïve. Maybe most of them have never
really been worker ants before. Salaried people who spend long hours in
an office are usually of three kinds. A city like Mumbai has a lot of
the first kind, especially at the bottom rungs. They come very early;
they even go to work a day after, say, a bomb blast. But that’s because
most of them live in such tiny crowded homes that their office offers
relief. It is a leap in the quality of their life.

I used to work in an office where the peons, guards and even clerks
clocked in very early to have a bath and use the toilets, for which they
would otherwise have to stand in queues back home. Also, singles spend a
lot of time in office because they don’t have a home life—the reason I
got to know that people came early to have a bath.

The third group of people spend a lot of time at work because they are
doing other work. For instance, there was a place where I was clocking
16 hours every day because I was working on my novel. There is a fourth
category, which includes most Indians. They clock long hours but don’t
do any work. They just drink a lot of chai and chat. They can even do it
90 hours a week.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*
