# Just how ‘innocent’ are civilians during times of war?

*2025-05-11*

A principle of modern war is that I should not be killed. As a civilian,
I am ‘innocent.’ Only a war would call me that, though. It is somehow
odd that the official position of Pakistan is that I am innocent. You,
too, are probably innocent, and also everyone else in my residential
colony. Including the old men who have always walked briskly, calling
for a “strong hand." We are the innocents. We have put some people in
uniform, as though to clearly mark them out as ‘not innocent’—who can be
targeted, for which we pay them rich compliments.

But how innocent are we?

***Also Read:*** *Operation Sindoor: The IAF has struck terror camps in
Pakistan*

What do innocents do? They bay for justice, to satiate whom a nation
often performs an act of war or even goes to war. Innocents elect
leaders who have the nerve to do this. Innocents also say nasty things
about the widow of a man who was killed by terrorists in Pahalgam for
asking them not to harm Indian Muslims or Kashmiris for what the killers
did. Some innocents also riot. Sometimes, innocents spread propaganda
against the enemy—but ‘peacefully.’ Peaceful tasks could include
non-violent activities that may lead to violence.

Pakistan, too, has its innocents, who donate to terror outfits and
consider terrorists freedom fighters. Palestinian innocents voted the
Hamas to power in Gaza; some analysts say it was only to build schools
and suchlike. There is also a network of monocultural innocents who go
on protests in the West in support of Palestinians. 

They solve the mystery behind how Hamas was foolish enough to invade
Israel on 7 October 2023, kill nearly 2,000 people and abduct hundreds.
The group may have expected to commit a massacre and then hide behind
innocents in Gaza, letting the monoculture network of innocents in
America and Europe amplify news of every innocent killed by Israeli
action. Palestinian innocents were a human shield for Hamas.

Every nation has innocents. Most of the world is innocent. And nations
try hard not to harm innocents in enemy territory.

***Also Read:*** *Pakistan must step back from the brink of worse*

When India struck Pakistan a few days ago, it stated that no civilians
were killed—or targeted. The ministry of external affairs said: “These
actions were measured, non-escalatory, proportionate, and responsible.
They focused on dismantling the terrorist infrastructure and disabling
terrorists likely to be sent across to India."

The very meaning of terrorism is that it kills innocents because it
cannot fight an open war against armed forces. It has no moral standing
today. Most nations that deploy terrorism do it in secrecy. Because
morality is primarily about decorum, which no modern nation can afford
to break.

The modern world is a very moral place. In another time, innocents on
the losing side would be killed or enslaved by the winners. That is
unacceptable today, but it still happens. There is no nation on
earth—probably not even a tribe—whose official position is not moral.
Even aggression has to be framed as something moral. And at the heart of
all morality is the precious life of the ‘innocent’ civilian.

Yet, the innocents of the world are neither good nor bad. As in
everything else about them, and in everything that they do, their
goodness is unremarkable. If you consider the political noise made by
innocents on social media, it would appear that many of them are, in
fact, war-mongers.

After the Pahalgam massacre, the typical Indian politician often came
across as more mature and humane than the average Indian on social
media. But those people are usually better than what their opinions may
suggest. This is usually so of conservatives, while the opposite is
often true of liberals.

Also, media noise does not necessarily reflect the majority of people,
who probably wish to be good in an ordinary way—even to Pakistani
innocents.

***Also Read:*** *Nitin Pai: India must stay the course in its old
contest with Pakistan*

This ordinary goodness is not entirely caused by practicality. It is in
the nature of people not to wish death on other innocents. In some
situations, this may be hard to accept. For instance, at the funeral of
one of the Pakistanis killed in the Indian strikes, I do not think there
would be many people who would defend my right to live, innocent though
I am. But most of the time, innocents do not wish other innocents dead.
There are stories about how soldiers on the battlefield were reluctant
to kill; how in some wars, most soldiers did not fire at others, just
pretended to do so.

I believe in the ordinary goodness of most people, but it is of no real
use for peace. It takes just a handful of mad people—and evil is a form
of articulate insanity—to end peace and nurture violence for years. That
is because disorder is easier than order.

All of the universe tends towards disorder because there are many ways
in which disarray can be achieved, but only a few ways in which
something can be held together in a fine balance. Considering that, we
have done a magnificent job.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’*
