# Migrating to the US has long been a rite of humiliation

*2025-01-26*

Even the most dignified part of the process, which was the first step,
where the bright applied for a student visa to go study something in
science, lacked grace. 

An enduring memory of my childhood in Madras is the sight of a half
mile-long queue of the city’s cultural elite for their fateful visa
interviews. They were top rankers, IITians and doctors and those who had
got job offers, and they waited for hours in the hot sun (the consulate
put up sun shades only years later). 

For people like me, who had no prospects and passed by Mount Road in
public buses, it was the first clear sight of what prospects really
looked like—a wait outside the American consulate. And my lack of
prospects didn’t seem so bad.

But when the bus turned a corner, a familiar fear filled all of us who
chose to be artists and were apparently of no use to America and the
‘Free World’—if you were not standing in that queue with a science
degree, what would become of you?

That America is a “land of immigrants" is among the nonsensical
flourishes of language, on par with “spirit of Mumbai." America may have
once accepted all sorts of people, but they and their descendants have
no particular fondness of immigrants anymore. 

At most, they only want the rich and talented, and even among the
talented, only those who would be of practical use.

So, generations of Indians worked hard to become useful to America. Some
even fooled themselves into believing they were needed because Americans
were “dumb." But one way or another, talented Indians figured that their
place in the US was created because there were things Americans did not
wish to do anymore, or at least not for such low pay. 

Visa holders found their spouses could not work and their green cards
did not always convert into citizenship. And now, strategically
conceived children born on US soil will not get US citizenship if Trump
has his way. His order may get struck down by courts, but it is hard to
miss the layers of humiliation in going to a place where too many people
wish to go.

For centuries, only the poor and the persecuted migrated. They fled.
Even the early European migrants to the US were either destitute or
mistreated. The social elite had no reason to move out. 

Then, in the mid-20th century, the upper classes of poor nations began
moving to the US. These were the cultural elite, if not the economic
elite, who had an immense head start in their own society. It was yet
another opportunity life gifted them—migrate to a richer nation.

They had to pay a price. From being masters in their home towns, atop
the social pyramid, they became something else in America that can be
captured by an expression Indians once used commonly: “second-class
citizens." What they meant by this was that the American upper classes
viewed them the way they viewed lower classes in India.

Everywhere, the migrant is treated badly. The poor are equipped to take
it in their stride because they are used to being treated in this manner
even if they are not migrants. The Indian upper class is not so suited
for poor treatment. Every little discrimination stings them.

This may explain why many of them began to love India more than Indians
themselves back home. When an old elite feels slighted in a new place,
it compensates with great love for what made it feel special. An
unspoken history of the world is how America, to which the elite of poor
nations thronged, created expat nationalism.

As another form of compensation, possibly, some of these immigrants also
acquired an exaggerated swag—that they succeeded in America because they
were bright and “worked very hard," compared to other groups.

It is this popular but dim analysis that American politician Vivek
Ramaswamy appears to have aired in a recent tweet: “Our American culture
has venerated mediocrity over excellence for way too long… A culture
that celebrates the prom queen over the math olympiad champ… I know
multiple sets of immigrant parents in the 90s who actively limited how
much their kids could watch those TV shows precisely because they
promoted mediocrity… and their kids went on to become wildly successful
STEM graduates…"

The truth reveals itself if you trace the lineage of successful
individuals of ‘Indian origin’ who claim to have done well because they
“worked hard." The first wave of Indian immigrants did well chiefly
because they were the actual or metaphorical Brahmins of where they came
from; they had an enormous head-start not only over other Asian
immigrants, but also over most Americans. Their children, in turn, were
better placed to harvest their luck. Yet, it is important for the Indian
community in America to go on about “hard work." The false preening of
the lucky often makes the less fortunate feel that it is all their
fault, when usually it is not.

Elite Indians in the US, it seems, want Trump’s America to make a
distinction between Indians and Mexicans, and all the other immigrants
who face his ire, including “irregular" Indian immigrants. 

But then, typically, the ruling class of a society does not see people
through income statistics and their college degrees. It goes by
appearances. And to much of the American elite, maybe all Indians look
the same. In fact, all immigrants may look the same.

The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.

 
