# Why nobody talks about India’s ‘brain drain’ anymore

*2025-02-02*

Yet, we enthusiastically debated the issue. The debate wasn’t over
whether brain drain existed, but whether the government should stop it.
Now, for some reason, I don’t hear anyone use that expression, though
occasionally people do mention that our “brightest" go to the US.

The reason for its disappearance isn’t that society felt our feelings
needed to be protected. I think what has happened is that nobody truly
believes brain drain is real—or at least not in the way it was once
imagined.

To most Indians, the brain is still an organ that is useful in cracking
objective-type exams, or being good at any science. In that sense, the
Indian brain has not expanded. It is just that the migration of ‘brains’
has not had any impact on India because there are so many brains.

We have easily filled the spaces that the so-called bright vacated by
leaving India. Not just that. The kind of people who were once
considered ‘brains’ turned out to be merely people who were lucky enough
to be born in the right homes. Just look at what happened when
opportunities seeped down the social pyramid.

In fact, today, the children of the affluent who are inclined to “do
science," or whose parents want them to do it, leave India because they
can’t compete with other Indians for admissions to any of the most
sought-after engineering colleges. The children of IITians, generally,
have little chance of getting into the Indian Institutes of Technology.
The upper class is unable to compete with equality.

In any case, the migration of thousands of scientific ‘brains’ has not
been a drain. When the upper classes vacate their monopoly, others step
in to fill the gap. The elite have been quitting not only India, but
also entire fields like hardcore engineering. In a world where parents
want to be nicer, children are drifting towards more enjoyable or
fashionable fields, like rocketry. This gives other classes the chance
to venture into what were once fiefdoms of the elite.

We have easily filled the spaces that the so-called bright vacated by
leaving India.

What drops in this process is the field’s prestige. The urban upper
crust does something and insists that others regard it as “brainy" and
lucrative. Others imitate them, slog for years, and achieve the capacity
to do that “brainy" thing. But they realize the rewards are not the same
for them. Once the elite vacates something, those spheres lose their
allure. (This happened to the civil services and railway bureaucracy,
too.)

Older IITians now say that the current profile of the Indian engineer
student is appalling. Older bureaucrats say the same of the civil
services. Because now they seem to see the ‘brain’ as not just an organ
that cracks an entrance exam, but as something that produces a “rounded
personality," by which they often mean quizzing and playing Carnatic
music. That is what the IITians of my generation did.

There is a view in India that we have millions of science and
engineering degree-holders but very few talented people. And that those
with any talent leave the country. The idea that the migration of people
who are very good in science has reduced the quality of Indian
intellectual life is an opinion that many people still hold. Yet, it is
not a ‘brain drain’ because few truly believe that those people could
have done much here.

Many years ago, a chief guest at a convocation ceremony at IIT Madras
said, “Brain drain is better than brain in the drain." I don’t know if
it was his original joke, but what I know is that all of Madras got to
know within hours, and how we all laughed. Some of them who laughed are
American citizens now and they do not laugh anymore at India jokes. Now,
no chief guest would crack such a joke, but that is not because India
has become a cradle of scientific innovation.

For a scientific genius to have an impact, he or she needs the right
environment, which is best created by a combination of a government that
knows what it is doing and capitalistic greed. American tech is largely
the creation of the US government. That is why it is laughable that tech
‘bros’ keep talking about “small government." Their own fortunes have
been driven by government policy to a large extent.

There is, however, such a thing as a brain drain in one respect. It is
not really about the migration of some people from India to the West. It
is a drain within the sciences. Whatever gets hyped attracts the cream
of scientific talent for years. And it also diverts the attention of
enterprise, and even the government.

Take the current hysteria around artificial intelligence, for instance.
It holds some promise of public benefits in the vague distant future,
but if the past is any indicator, millions of ‘brains’ would have worked
for billions of hours to create a whole new array of frivolous things.
And at the expense of scientific fields that are left reeling in
neglect.

Just as the arts probably lost its best to the sciences, many sciences
are losing talent to narrower domains of tech. Science, today, survives
on hype. Modern medicine has been stuck for ages. It is not as
transformative as it appears, especially if you are a healthy person.
And, compared to a hundred years ago, we have not expanded our
understanding of much.

We still have no clue what gravity is at a fundamental level. And we
travel by air at the same speed as our grandparents. That is brain
drain.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*
