# Longevity is usually a reward for being unspectacular

*2025-01-05*

For a man who was said to be incapable of subterfuge or even office
politics, a skill in which Indians excel, Dr. Singh thrived in public
office. He had been governor of the Reserve Bank of India and our most
famous finance minister before he became one of India’s longest-serving
prime ministers.

And he could achieve all this not only because he had an economic
vision, but chiefly because he was not politically extraordinary. His
source of power was assured that he would always need them and that he
would never develop another source.

Often, endurance is nature’s reward to a person whose presence is not
spectacular. This phenomenon can be seen in almost everything humans do.

This is why corporate bosses, even when they claim, “I only hire people
who are smarter than me," typically don’t do that at all, especially
when that fact is too evident in the ‘smarter’ candidate.

A nerd with narrow genius and no managerial prospects might fare well,
but people whose presence or role is spectacular in a broad way do not
go very far up the tapering hierarchy.

Founders and entrepreneurs always pounce on super talent as they are at
no threat of being eclipsed, but in a typical office, the calibre of a
boss is often the upper limit for talent in his team.

The spectacular have to, sooner or later, quit the safety of their
salaried jobs and take their chances in entrepreneurship, where they are
dependent on ‘clients,’ who are usually salaried executives.

The way people celebrate the spectacular, it would appear as though they
are wired to back the extraordinary. But the fact is they make life
difficult for those who are special and cannot be tamed.

What the world celebrates is success, as though it has a grudging
admiration for the spectacular who managed to make it despite everything
the ordinary threw at them. Usually, most spectacular people don’t make
it very far.

When Manmohan Singh’s political career strayed into the spectacular, it
created an environment where he could continue to lead the nation. He
had unexpectedly trumped all the politicking satraps of the Congress
party to become prime minister, not once, but twice.

The satraps had had enough. His second term was tormented by the
politicking of those who thought they deserved to be in his seat. Not
just that, the Indian middle class, whose hero he had been for two
decades, whom he had directly enriched, seemed to turn against him. They
found tiring the very calm things that they had once found appealing.

Particularly amusing was their lament that he did not stand up to party
bosses. But then, that was probably their nature too, for that is the
nature of the average person. That is how the ordinary survive and even
thrive, by not taking on the bosses whose power favours them.

At least Singh had the courage to pick his battles. In the end, he had
survived in politics for so long that he became formidable whether he
liked to be so or not. And he was assailed by his own party.

Even in cricket, nature rewards the ordinary through a long career.
Athletes like Sachin Tendulkar are rare. They endured for long in spite
of their spectacular brilliance. Usually, people at that level shine
bright for a few years and vanish, developing an injury or losing
control of unhealthy habits.

In cricket, they survive through the hyperbole of captaincy, which is
the traditional refuge of middling batsmen or great batsmen who are past
their prime.

Mostly, the sort of batsmen who endure, who last long, are Test
plodders—who do not take risks, who do not have too many strokes in them
to increase their chance of getting out. As in most of life, so in
cricket, the ordinary endure. Even the former greats endure through
ordinariness.

Endurance is greatness for ordinary people; it is compensation for
ordinariness. Can it then be that companies or even professions where
people can endure for long are usually spheres in decay? Like, say, the
bureaucracy, where people last even beyond retirement?

Even in the animal world, endurance is a reward for not being
spectacular. Animals in the zoo, for instance, outlive their feral
relatives. Humans too have begun to endure because we do not have to do
anything spectacular anymore. Once, being a spectacular human was to be
a warrior or an athlete who took many risks.

Now, the spectacular person is someone who wishes to enjoy the material
life. Those who live less interesting lives are destined to endure. Even
in recreational running, the trick to keep at it well into old age is to
maintain a low average heart rate, done by mixing runs with short walks.
While great sprinters eventually stop, steady-paced runners can keep
going for years.

Current Prime Minister Narendra Modi has used his popular charisma to
strengthen his hold. And he, too, has endured. Though his case is as
rare as Tendulkar’s. Before him, the last prime minister whose
leadership was spectacular was Indira Gandhi, but in a time that was
more conducive to the rise of such leaders.

An important quality, though, of modern spectacular leaders is that when
they started off their careers, they were not so spectacular; or never
showed that side.

 

 
