# America and the bearable loneliness of losing the West

*2025-02-23*

When I was a kid, I believed the West was a place. Then I realized that
all of the West was not entirely the West. The West was an idea, an
invention. When you put it this way, it looks as though it is some kind
of subterfuge to overwhelm human instincts. 

But I like that about the West—that it was an invention. What is so
great about nature and human nature anyway? We worship nature without
thinking. Human intervention against our own animal biology is probably
the very meaning of human wisdom.

What is happening in America will help us understand the meaning of the
West— through its collapse there. A lot of what Donald Trump is doing
actually makes sense. Or let us say it makes logical sense; it is even
familiar. 

A powerful man is setting out to consolidate his power, to do what he
wants without the inconvenience of being resisted. He favours his rich
friends, and a gang of rich people are trying to see how they can
benefit from his rule. Together, they want to convey that falling in
line will be rewarded and fighting them painful. This makes sense
because this is how leaders behave in most of the world. Now America is
beginning to appear like any other country.

And now we see clearly what the West stood for, in theory—the idea that
a popularly elected leader has to be controlled and tamed by
conscientious clerks, that the point of a society is not to be
practical, but for the strong to care for the weak, that everyone must
be free to express themselves, especially minorities. The West said all
this without fables of divinity or anything mystical. As for why
idealism was better than pragmatism, it had no evidence, but persuaded
us all.

But then, even before Trump, it was becoming clear that the ideals of
the West were a theology that used morals to favour some people. And its
evangelism of democracy was not meant to make the world a better place,
but to weaken other countries’ revolutions—the chaos that America once
thought it was safe from. Just as rogue states promoted terrorism to
weaken their enemies but were consumed by the same thing.

Everything the West did, buoyed by its cultural heft, was better than
what I was used to. Even intellectually, the West seemed superior. Rich
or poor, people in every generation who want to make something of their
lives want to head to a place where all the magic is. Once it was
Alexandria, and there was Nalanda, or so I am told. The West held that
magic in modern times. People not only flocked to it physically, but
also mentally.

Trump keeps talking about the US trade deficit, but there was always a
cultural surplus that America and Europe maintained with the rest of the
world. There was a demand gap. 

We were more interested in them than they were in us. Whatever they said
was good, we read. I remember as a teenager marvelling at some of the
literary works of the West. Now, when I read them, I find many were
mediocre. I can see through the ordinariness of Western acclaim and how
that acclaim is an industry in itself—meant to promote a certain way of
thinking, a certain set of people.

Nobody in Somalia or India, or even China, hosts an award that Western
artists covet. This should give you an idea of the cultural gap. It was
underpinned by the notion that Western intellectuals are very discerning
of the arts and intellectual pursuits, that they are free, and their
savants are not people who suck up to a strongman but independent
thinkers that only the West could foster. 

One way or another, in some form, we accepted that. That is why we read
the works of those people more than they read ours, and we watch their
films and listen to their music even though they know almost nothing
about us. What tariffs could bridge our cultural deficit with the West?
That is a subject for another column.

Now that the West has been diminished and it is hard for us to adore
everything it produces, I find its humanities lingo unbearable,
especially when one of its eggheads says something like this: ‘…a richly
layered meditation on the loss of an ideal and a mournful critique…’

But the West’s loss of moral and intellectual heft feels like a form of
loneliness. For years, many of us had something to enjoy, something to
accept, and a sense of direction, but now we only have home. Like
villagers forced to return to a village from a great city.

There is also a surprising area where the West has failed. 

It has turned inefficient in a banal way. Recently, when I was at Berlin
airport, my luggage took one hour to arrive. Trains were delayed by
hours every day. This was not the image I had of Germany. The country
simply doesn’t have enough people to do mindless tasks. Germans are
confused about poor migrants who can do that for them. They want them,
but don’t want to see them. And the promise of mindless machines doing
all repetitive jobs is yet to come true.

I still enjoy the spectacle of the West. All the beauty and order and
street joys that their wealth and past plunder have created. Of all the
things that the West once meant to us, we are now only left with winding
cobbled ways.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*
