# There’s crushing news for people who want to live long

*2025-04-20*

A few days ago, Bryan Johnson, a centi-millionaire who has spent
millions on reversing ageing—especially his own—posted some bad news for
humanity on his YouTube channel. Rapamycin, which for a long time has
been the most promising molecule in our quest to prolong youth, was not
making him younger; instead, it was “accelerating" his ageing.

Johnson, who is 47 and looks 46, conducts various experiments on himself
in his effort to live like a young man for a very long time. I am
counting on him. His food consumption is so calibrated that he knows the
number of calories he has gulped. He does not eat after 11am, unless he
has to meet people socially and must eat at ungodly hours like 7pm just
to shut them up. He sleeps around 8:30pm, alone. 

I know he has high standards for himself because he recently visited
Delhi, probably out of ignorance, and refused to breathe the air for too
long. Among the most important things he was performing on himself was
taking small quantities of rapamycin, a drug that is chiefly used to
prevent the body’s rejection of organ transplants. It does not have
approval as an anti-ageing drug, though it is widely believed to have
potential for that. The compound had extended the lifespan of mice and
worms beyond ambiguity, and of other animals, too. Johnson was its most
famous human test subject.

Rapamycin was probably the world’s best shot at achieving prolonged
youth by just popping a pill. It still is, because science will persist.
But Johnson’s verdict is a crushing blow. In September, he stopped
taking it because of signs that it was harming him. In January, he
wrote, “Despite the immense potential from pre-clinical trials, my team
and I came to the conclusion that the benefits of lifelong dosing of
Rapamycin do not justify the hefty side-effects (intermittent skin/soft
tissue infections, lipid abnormalities, glucose elevations, and
increased resting heart rate)." 

Also, the way his body was reacting to the drug nudged him to take
seriously a recent research paper that said the compound may accelerate
ageing across 16 biological markers of age. A few days ago, he made a
video to announce the bad news.

The moment he went public, in a logical world, ministers would have
rushed into huddles to ask “what now?" and our phones would be abuzz
with “did you hear?" and billionaires would’ve cleared their schedules
to deal with the sorrow that the probability of their mortality was
higher than they had hoped. But, strangely, this is not how humans react
to news that there is a good chance a miracle drug is not one.

Like many startling drugs, rapamycin was discovered accidentally. In the
1960s, a group of scientists collected soil from a remote island in the
southeastern Pacific Ocean, Rapa Nui, also known as Easter Island. One
of the scientists, Suren Sehgal, found that the soil sample contained a
powerful anti-fungal agent produced by a soil bacterium. He grew a
culture of it, and either he or his company Ayerst named it rapamycin
after Rapa Nui. 

Soon scientists realized it was much more than an anti-fungal agent. “It
was a potent immunosuppressant and stopped cells from multiplying,"
writes Venki Ramakrishnan in his book *Why We Die: The New Science of
Ageing and Longevity*. (An immunosuppressant drug impedes the body’s
immune system from mistakenly attacking its own tissues.)

There’s a protein mechanism in our cells that controls how they behave.
When nutrients are plentiful, cells grow, multiply and store fat. But
when they are scarce, cells slow down growth and fat storage, and
instead focus on cleaning up damaged parts and recycling them. All
living things have this, which means that evolution thought it was very
important.

Rapamycin can mimic this nutrient-deficient state, prompting cells to
shift into maintenance and repair mode. For some reason, when cells do
this, it extends the organism’s lifespan. This is why fasts are believed
to be beneficial. Rapamycin essentially mimics fasting conditions.

A strange thing about food is that it supports life but also eventually
kills. Its excess, chiefly, affects us at a cellular level. People who
are slightly deficient in food tend to be healthier than the gluttons. A
miracle I know from close observations of Malayalee alcoholics who eat
moderately is that they outlive food addicts. Rapamycin can make the
cells of gluttons think they are starved.

Rapamycin’s key ingredient is only found on that remote Pacific island.
Peter Attia says in *Outlive*, “It was uncanny: this exotic molecule,
found only on an isolated scrap of land in the middle of the ocean, acts
almost like a switch that inhibits a very specific cellular mechanism
that exists in nearly everything that lives. It was a perfect fit, and
this fact still blows my mind every time I think about it." But
Rapamycin does not seem to work as well in humans as it does in some
animals. Nobody is sure why.

You may wonder what the fuss is about. Some humans already have lived
way beyond 100; we just need to study them. Some centenarians are said
to have lived heartily on wine and tasty breads. Haven’t we all heard of
the Mediterranean people and those in Okinawa? Sadly, most of these
stories are erroneous or exaggerated.

Saul Newman, a researcher, wrote in *The New York Times* that there has
been a significant drop in claims of people living over the age of 110
since the advent of birth certificates. Most claims of advanced age
could be clerical errors and frauds. This holds true for Okinawan and
Mediterranean tales of long life. We needed Rapamycin to work.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*
