# Trump’s Gaza plan may be more pragmatic than it looks

*2025-02-09*

The second-best is not Donald Trump’s original idea. Such a plan was
mooted around the time Israel was formed in 1948, and later by Jewish
nationalists. It was never a popular idea. 

Long before Trump pitched it as an American real-estate redevelopment
plan, it was disliked by those who represented the Palestinian people,
those who were conscious of their moral compass and those who did not
want the problem to end because conflict was their business. It was also
disliked by Arab nations that loved Palestinians from afar and seemed
reluctant to have them settling in their territory. Trump probably knew
that—which was why he said the people of Gaza could be taken in by
“humanitarian" Arab nations.

The relocation of Gaza’s Palestinians, who number half the number of
passengers who take the Delhi Metro everyday, to resolve one of the
greatest problems of the modern world is not as outlandish as it seems
at first glance. Certainly not as a logistical problem.

Gaza’s Palestinians have been relocated before in huge numbers. The
wealthy and lucky among them left. Many live in other Arab nations, and
also in the US and Europe. Much of the Palestinian elite did ‘relocate’
to other countries, leaving the poor behind to fight for the Palestinian
cause.

This is a familiar story in every conflict zone. I saw it as a child in
Madras among the swarms of middle-class Tamils who fled elsewhere (the
rich fled to the UK).

The correct way to frame the relocation question is this: Now that the
Palestinian elite live outside Palestine, can the poor too be relocated
to nations ready to take them?

Across the world, and for ages, the poor have relocated for better
prospects. Look at the Indians who were deported by the US. They faced
no violent conflict here. Yet, they left India, endured conditions worse
than ultra marathons, climbed hills and almost died along the way, all
to enter the US.

If there is a secret referendum among the people of Gaza on their
willingness to move out of the debris to other Arab nations, I am
confident most will say ‘yes.’ Because the poor in a poor region tend to
have the exact opposite view of their rich expats.

Many people around the world who want poor Palestinians to stay put in
Gaza and fight for a Palestinian state actually live in places that
evicted natives. What do you think our places were before; and where did
those people go? They were expected to pack their things and disperse,
and that is what they did. That is the history of all big cities. But
Israel is in a more complicated place.

Here is a brief history of the conflict’s origin. In the late 19th
century, the Jewish elite of Britain came up with the idea of going back
to their mythical promised land, Palestine, to escape a violent bias
against them. This bold idea found support from the Jewish elite
globally. Also from the mainstream British and European elite, possibly
because they wanted the ‘Jewish problem’ to go away. 

It might seem bizarre today that Europeans could just go somewhere and
claim land, but it was the golden age of racism. It is as though they
did not see natives as real people. When Jewish settlements in Palestine
began, half a million Arabs lived there. They were stateless. Many were
nomadic. As Jews settled in larger numbers, skirmishes began between
local Arabs and settlers. 

The idea of a Palestinian identity was not formed yet. It was a creation
of the Arab elite in response to the rising power of Jewish settlers in
the region. Once the state of Israel was created, most Arab nations
denied its right to exist, but the brilliant little nation overcame its
bigger foes and kept expanding to push Palestinians into slivers of
land. One of these was Gaza.

While Palestinians want their own sovereign state, Israel fears an
independent Palestine next to it because it would be easier for
extremist groups like Hamas to execute their stated dream—the
obliteration of Israel.

If Palestinians vacate Gaza, what happens to their wish for Palestinian
statehood? Would the inland West Bank suffice? The chances of a
Palestine state would look bleaker than ever before. But then, the world
is only pretending that Palestinians have not lost. This is at the heart
of the trouble.

In a more ancient world, which was a less compassionate place, wars
ended conflicts decisively. The losers were all killed or subsumed. The
meaning of loss was very clear. But the modern world does not recognize
defeat. Now, the defeated linger. They can survive long years as
stateless people, bereaved and maimed. And if they are given a choice to
escape their torment and move to another place for lives of dignity,
there is an army of faraway humanitarians who won’t give them even that
chance.

Those who scoff at Trump’s relocation plan, do they have another
solution to the problem? Of course. This is their solution: the people
of Gaza should magically shed Hamas and any other band of armed thugs
Iran may fund, and talk peacefully with Israel, which will magically
start believing that Palestinians would make excellent neighbours.

This is the mainstream plan of the global intellectual world, endorsed
by people who consider Trump’s relocation plan “improbable." They had
also said that about Donald Trump’s presidency.

*The author is a journalist, novelist, and the creator of the Netflix
series, ‘Decoupled’.*
